in the Austrian Legal Information System
Table of contents
Article1
(Constitutional provision)
§1.Fundamental right to data protection
(Note: §2 and §3 repealed by Federal Law Gazette I No14/2019)
Article2
Chapter 1
Implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation andsupplementary provisions
Part 1
General provisions
§4.Scope of application and implementing provision
§5.Data protection officer
§6.Confidentiality of data
Part 2
Data processing for specific purposes
§7.Processing for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific orhistorical research purposes or statistical purposes
§8.Providing addresses to inform and interview data subjects
§9.Freedom of expression and information
§10.Processing of personal data in case of emergency
§11.Reprimand by the Data Protection Authority
Part 3
Processing of images
§12.Permissibility of recording images
§13.Special data security measures and referencing
Chapter 2
Bodies
Part 1
Data Protection Council
§14.Establishment and duties
§15.Composition
§16.Chair and management
§17.Meetings and resolutions
Part 2
Data Protection Authority
§18.Establishment
§19.Independent status
§20.The head of the Data Protection Authority
§21.Tasks
§22.Powers
§23.Activity reports and the publication of decisions
Part 3
Remedies, liability and penalties
§24.Complaints with the Data Protection Authority
§25.Accompanying measures in the complaint procedure
§26.Public-sector and private-sector controllers
§27.Complaints with the Federal Administrative Court
§28.Representation of data subjects
§29.Right to compensation and liability
§30.General conditions for imposing administrative fines
Part 4
Supervisory authority pursuant to Directive(EU)2016/680
§31.Data Protection Authority
§32.Tasks of the Data Protection Authority
§33.Powers of the Data Protection Authority
§34.General provisions
Part 5
Special powers of the Data Protection Authority
Chapter3
Processing of personal data for purposes of the security police, including theprotection of public security by the police, the protection of military facilitiesby the armed forces, the resolution and prosecution of criminal offences, the enforcement ofsentences and the enforcement of precautionary measures involving the deprivation of liberty
Part 1
General provisions
§36.Scope of application, and definitions
§37.Principles for processing, classification and data quality
§38.Lawfulness of processing
§39.Processing of special categories of personal data
§40.Processing for other purposes, and transfer
§41.Automated individual decision-making
Part 2
§42.Principles
§43.Information of the data subject
§44.Right of access by the data subject
§45.Right to rectification or erasure of personal data and to the restriction ofprocessing
Part 3
Controller and processor
§46.Obligations of the controller
§47.Joint controllers
§48.Processor and the supervision of processing
§49.Records of processing activities
§50.Logging
§51.Cooperation with the Data Protection Authority
§52.Data protection impact assessment
§53.Prior consultation of the Data Protection Authority
§54.Data security measures
§55.Notification of a breach to the Data Protection Authority
§56.Communication ofpersonal data breaches to data subjects
§57.Designation, position and tasks of the data protection officer
Part 4
Transfers of personal data to third countries or international organisations
§58.General principles for transfers of personal data
§59.Data transfers to third countries or international organisations
§61.repealed by Federal Law Gazette I No14/2019)
Chapter 4
Special penal provisions
§62.Administrative penalties
§63.Processing with the intention to make a profit or to cause harm
Chapter 5
Final provisions
§64.Execution and implementation of EU legal acts
§65.Gender-neutral use of language
§66.Enactment of regulations
§67.References
§68.Execution
§69.Transitional provisions
§70.Entry into force
Article1
(Constitutional provision)
Fundamental right to data protection
§1.(1) Every person shall have the right to secrecy of the personal dataconcerning that person, especially with regard to the respect for his or her privateand family life, insofar as that person has an interest which deserves such protection.Such an interest is precluded if data cannot be subject to the right to secrecy due tothe data’s general availability or because they cannot be traced back to the datasubject.
(2) Insofar as personal data are not used in the vital interest of the data subjector with the data subject’s consent, restrictions of the right to secrecy are permittedonly to safeguard overriding legitimate interests of another person, namely in the case of interference by a public authority only on the basis of laws which arenecessary for the reasons stated in Article8 para.2 of the European Convention forthe Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR), Federal LawGazette No210/1958. Such laws may provide for the use of data that, due to theirnature, deserve special protection only in order to safeguard substantial publicinterests and, at the same time, shallprovide for adequate safeguards for theprotection of the data subjects’ interests in confidentiality. Even in the case ofpermitted restrictions, a fundamental right may only be interfered with using theleast intrusive of all effective methods.
(3) Insofar as personal data concerning a person are intended for automatedprocessing or processing in files managed manually, i.e. files managed withoutautomated processing, every person shall, as provided for by law, have 1.the right to obtain information as to who processes what data concerning the person, where the data originated from,for which purpose they are used,and in particular to whom the data are transmitted; 2.the right to rectification of incorrect data andthe right to erasure of illegally processed data.
(4) Restrictions of the rights according to para.3 are only permitted under theconditions laidout in para.2.
Article21
Chapter 1
Implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation and supplementary provisions
Part 1
General provisions
Scope of application and implementing provision
§4.(1) The provisions of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the protection ofnatural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the freemovement of such data, and repealing Directive95/46/EC (General Data ProtectionRegulation), OJ NoL119 of 4May2016, p.1 (in the following: General Data Protection Regulation) and this federal law shall apply to the processing of personaldata of natural persons wholly or partly by automated means and to the processingother than by automated means of personal data of natural persons which form partof a filing system or are intended to form part of a filing system, unless the morespecific provisions of Chapter3 of this federal law prevail.
(2) If personal data processed by automated means cannot be rectified or erasedimmediately because they can be rectified or erased onlyat certain times foreconomic or technical reasons, processing of the personal data concerned shall berestricted until that time, with the effect as stipulated in Article18 para.2of theGeneral Data Protection Regulation.
(3) Processing personal data on acts or omissions punishable by courts oradministrative authorities, in particular concerning suspected criminal offences, aswell as data on criminal convictions and precautionarymeasures involving thedeprivation of liberty, is permitted if the requirements of the General DataProtection Regulation are met and if
1.anexplicit legal authorisation or obligation to process such data exists; or
2.the legitimacy of the processing of such data is otherwise based on statutory duties of diligence, or processing is necessary for the purposes of thelegitimate interests pursued by the controller or by a third party pursuant toArticle6 para.1 (f) of the General Data Protection Regulation, and themanner in which the data are processed safeguards the interests of the datasubject according the General Data Protection Regulation and this federallaw.
(4) In the case of an offer ofinformation society services directly to a child,consent to the processing of the personal data of a child pursuant to Article6 para.1 (a) of the General Data Protection Regulation shall be lawful where the child is atleast 14 years old.
(5) Without prejudice to other statutory restrictions, data subjects shall not havea right of access pursuant to Article15 of the General Data Protection Regulation inrelation to a controller acting with public authority and powers if granting accessput at risk performance of a task delegated to the controller by law.
(6) Without prejudice to other statutory restrictions, data subjects shall not havea right of access pursuant to Article15 of the General Data Protection Regulation inrelation to a controller if granting access put at risk a trade or business secret of thecontroller or a third party.
Data protectionofficer
§5.(1) Without prejudice to otherobligations of confidentiality, the dataprotection officer and the persons working for the data protection officer shall bebound by confidentiality when fulfilling their duties. This shall apply in particularin relation to the identity of data subjectswho applied to the data protection officer,and to circumstances that allow identification of these persons, unless the datasubject has expressly granted a release from confidentiality. The data protectionofficer and the persons working for the data protection officer may exclusively useinformation made available to fulfil their duties and shall be bound byconfidentiality even after the end of their activities.
(2) If, during his or her activities, a data protection officer obtains knowledgeof data in respect of which a person employed with a body subject to the supervisionof the data protection officer has a statutory right to refuse to give evidence, the dataprotection officer and the persons working for the data protection officers shall alsohave such a right to the extent to which the person who has the right to refuse togive evidence exercised that right. The files and other documents of the dataprotection officer are subject to a prohibition of seizure and confiscation to theextent of the right of the data protection officer to refuse to give evidence.
(3) Public-sector data protection officers (established in a form provided bypublic law, in particular also as an officer of a territorial authority) are not bound byany instructions when exercising their duties. The highest governing bodies orofficers have the right to obtain information on matters to be dealt with from apublic-sector data protection officer. The data protection officer shall provideinformation only insofar as the independence of the data protection officer asdescribed in Article38 para.3 of the General Data Protection Regulation is notimpaired by doing so.
(4) Considering the type and scope of data processing activities and dependingon the facilities of a federal ministry, one or several data protection officers shall beappointed in the sphere of responsibilities of each federal ministry. These data protection officers shall be employed by the relevant federal ministry or the relevantsubordinate office or other entity.
(5) Public-sector data protection officers pursuant to para.4 shall regularlyexchange information, in particular with regard to ensuring uniform data protectionstandards.
Confidentiality of data
§6.(1) The controller, the processor andtheir employees, i.e. employees andpersons in a quasi-employee relationship, shall ensure the confidentiality of personaldata from data processing activities that have been entrusted or have becomeaccessible to them solely due to their employment, without prejudice to otherstatutory obligations of confidentiality, unless a legitimate reason for thetransmission of the data that have been entrusted or have become accessible to themexists (confidentiality of data).
(2) Employees may transmit personal data only if expressly ordered to do soby their employer. Unless such an obligation of their employees already exists bylaw, the controller and the processor shall contractually bind their employees totransmitpersonal data from data processing activities only on the basis of orders andto maintain the confidentiality of data even after the end of their employment withthe controller or processor.
(3) The controller and the processor shall inform the employees affected bythese ordersabout the transmission orders applicable to them and about theconsequences of a violation of data confidentiality.
(4) Without prejudice to the right to give instructions under constitutional law,an employee must not incur any disadvantage from refusing to comply with an orderfor a prohibited transmission of data.
(5) The statutory right of a controller to refuse to give evidence shall not beavoided by questioning a processor working for the controller, and in particular notby seizing or confiscating documents processed by automated means.
Part 2 
Data processing for specific purposes
Processing for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes
§7.(1) For archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historicalresearch purposes or statistical purposes whose goal is not to obtain results in a formrelating to specific data subjects, the controller may process all personal datathat 1.are publicly accessible, 2.the controller has lawfully collected for other research projects or other purposes, or 3.are pseudonymised personal data for the controller, and the controller cannot establish the identity of the data subject by legal means.
(2) In the case of processing for archiving purposes in the public interest,scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes that do not fall underpara.1, personal data may be processed only 1.pursuant to specific legal provisions, 2.with the consent of the data subject, or 3.with a permit of the Data Protection Authority pursuant to para.3.
(3) A permit of the Data Protection Authority for the processing of personaldata for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific orhistorical researchpurposes or statistical purposes shall be granted at the request of the controllerordering the research project, if 1.the consent of the data subject is impossible to obtain because the data subject cannot be reached or the effort would otherwise be unreasonable, 2.there is a public interest in the processing for which a permit is sought, and 3.the professional aptitude of the controller has been satisfactorily demonstrated.
If special categories of personal data (Article9 of the General Data ProtectionRegulation) are to be collected, an important public interest in the research projectmust exist; furthermore, it must be ensured that the personal data are processed atthe premises of the controller ordering the research project only by persons who aresubject to a statutory obligation of confidentiality regarding the subject matter of theresearch project or whose reliability in this respect is credible. The Data ProtectionAuthority shall issue the permit subject to terms and conditions, insofar as this isnecessary to safeguard thedata subjects’ interests which deserve protection.
(4) A request according to para.3 must, however, be accompanied by astatement signed by the person authorised to exercise rights in respect of the datafiles from which the personal data are to be collected, stating that this person ismaking the data files available for the research project. Instead of this statement, awrit of enforcement (§367 para.1 of the Enforcement Code, Imperial Law GazetteNo79/1896) replacing this statement may be submitted.
(5) Even in cases where the processing of personal data for scientific researchpurposes or statistical purposes is permitted in a form which allows the identificationof data subjects, the data shall be coded without delay so that the data subjects areno longer identifiable if specific phases of scientific or statistical work can beperformed with personal data pursuant to para.1 subpara.3. Unless otherwiseexpressly provided for by law, data in a form which allows the identification of datasubjects shall be rendered unidentifiable as soon as it is no longer necessary forscientific or statistical work to keep them identifiable.
(6) Legal restrictions on the right to use personal data for other reasons, inparticular for copyright reasons, shall not be affected.
Providing addresses to inform and interview data subjects
§8.(1) Unless otherwise expressly provided for by law, providing address dataof a certain group of data subjects in order to inform or interview them shall requirethe consent of the data subjects.
(2) If, however, an infringement of the data subject’s interests in confidentialityis unlikely, considering the selection criteria for the group of data subjects and thesubject of the information or interview,no consent shall be required 1.if data from the same controller are processed, or 2.in the case of an intended transfer of address data to third parties, a)if there is also a public interest in the information or interview, or b)if none of the data subjects, after having received appropriate information on the reason and content of the transfer, hasobjected to thetransfer within a reasonable period.
(3) If the requirements of para.2 are not met and if obtaining the consent of thedata subjects pursuant to para.1 would require a disproportionateeffort, the transferof the address data shall be permissible with a permit of the Data ProtectionAuthority pursuant to para.4 if the data are to be transferred to third parties
1.for the purpose of information or an interview due to an important interest of the data subject,
2.due to an important public interestin the information or interview, or
3.for an interview of the data subjects for scientific or statistical purposes.
(4) At the request of a controller processing address data, the Data ProtectionAuthority shall grant the permit for their transfer if the controller has satisfactorilydemonstrated that the requirements stipulated in para.3 have been met and nooverriding interests in confidentiality which deserve protection on the part of thedata subjects represent an obstacle to the transfer. The Data Protection Authorityshall issue the permit subject to terms and conditions, insofar as this is necessary tosafeguard interests of the data subjects which deserve protection.
(5) The transferred address data shall only be processed for the permittedpurpose and shall be erased as soon as they are no longer needed for information orinterviews.
(6) If it is lawful pursuant to the aforementioned provisions to transfer thenames and addresses of persons belonging to a certain group of data subjects, theprocessing required for selecting the address data to be transferred shall also bepermitted.
Freedom of expression and information
§9.(1) The provisions of this federal law and Chapter II (principles),ChapterIII (rights of the data subject), Chapter IV (controller and processor),Chapter V (transfer of personal data to third countries or internationalorganisations), Chapter VI (independent supervisory authorities), Chapter VII
(cooperation and consistency) andChapter IX (specific data processing situations)of the General Data Protection Regulation shall not apply to the processing ofpersonal data by media owners,editors, copy editors and employees of a mediaundertaking or a media service as defined in the Media Act, Federal Law GazetteNo314/1981, for journalistic purposes of the media undertaking or media service.In exercising its powers in relation to the persons referred to in the first sentence,the Data Protection Authority shall take into consideration the protection of editorialconfidentiality (§31 of the Media Act).
(2) If it is necessary to reconcile the right to the protection of personal data withthefreedom of expression and information, Chapter II (principles), with theexception of Article5, Chapter III (rights of the data subject), ChapterIV (controllerand processor), with the exception of Articles28, 29 and 32, Chapter V (transfer ofpersonaldata to third countries or international organisations), Chapter VI
(independent supervisory authorities), ChapterVII (cooperation and consistency)and ChapterIX (specific data processing situations) of the General Data ProtectionRegulation shall not apply to processing for the purposes of academic, artistic orliterary expression. Of the provisions of this federal law, §6 (confidentiality of data)shall be applied in such cases.
Processing ofpersonal data in case of emergency
§10.(1) In case of emergency, public-sector controllers and relieforganisations shall be authorised to jointly process data to the extent that this isnecessary to assist persons directly affected by a disaster, to locate and identifymissing or deceased persons and to provide information to their relatives.
(2) Anybody who lawfully possessespersonal data shall be permitted totransfer these data to public-sector controllers and relief organisations if thesecontrollers and organisations need this personal data to manage a disaster for thepurposes specified in para.1.
(3) Thetransfer abroad of personal data is permitted insofar as this is absolutelynecessary to fulfil the purposes mentioned in para.1. Data that by themselves wouldmake the data subject liable to criminal prosecution shall not be transferred unlessthey are absolutely necessary for identification in a particular case. The DataProtection Authority shall be informed immediately about the data transfersperformed and about the circumstances of the motivating incident. The DataProtection Authority shall prohibitfurther data transfers if the interference with thefundamental right to data protection resulting from the data transfer is not justifiedby the special circumstances caused by a disaster.
(4) Based on a specific inquiry of a close relative of a person who has actuallyor presumably been directly affected by a disaster, controllers are authorised totransfer to the inquiring person personal data regarding the whereabouts of the datasubject and on the progress of the search, if the relative satisfactorily demonstrateshis or her identity and close relationship to the data subject.
Special categories of personal data (Article9 of the General Data ProtectionRegulation) may be transferred to close relatives only if they prove their identityand their capacity as a relative and if the transfer is necessary to safeguard theirrights or the rights of the data subject. The social insurance agenciesand authoritiesare obliged to assist the public-sector controllers and relief organisations if this isnecessary to verify the information provided by the inquiring person.
(5) Close relatives pursuant to this provision means parents, children, spouses,registered partners and companions in life of the data subjects. Other relatives mayreceive the aforementioned information under the same conditions as close relativesif they satisfactorily demonstrate a special close relationship to the person actuallyor presumably directly affected by a disaster.
(6) The personal data processed for the purposes of managing a disaster shallbe deletedimmediately if they are no longer required to fulfil the specific purpose.
Reprimand by the Data Protection Authority
§11.The Data Protection Authority shall apply the catalogue ofArticle83paras.2 to 6 of the General Data Protection Regulation in a manner so as to observeproportionality. In the case of first-time infringements, in particular, the Data Protection Authority shall use its corrective powers in accordance withArticle58of the General Data Protection Regulation, in particular by issuing reprimands.
Part 3
Processingof images
Permissibility of recording images
§12.(1) For the purposes of this Part, recording images means observingoccurrences in public or non-public space for private purposes, using technicaldevices for the processing of images. Recording images also includes acousticinformation processed together with the images. This Part shall apply to suchrecording of images unless other laws provide for more specific provisions.
(2) Considering the requirementspursuant to §13, recording images ispermitted if 1.it is necessary in the vital interest of a person, 2.the data subject has consented to the processing of the data subject’s personal data, 3.it is ordered or permitted by special statutory provisions,or 4.there are overriding legitimate interests of the controller or a third party in a particular case, and proportionality is given.
(3) Recording images pursuant to para.2 subpara.4 is permitted, in particular,if 1.it servesthe precautionary protection of persons and items on private land exclusively used by the controller and does not reach beyond the boundariesof the piece of land, except when it includes public traffic areas, which maybe unavoidable to fulfil the purpose of the image recording. 2.it is required for the precautionary protection of persons or items in publicly accessible places that are subject to the controller’s right to undisturbedpossession because that righthas already been infringed or because theplace, by its nature, has a special risk potential, or 3.it serves a private documentary interest and does not aim to record uninvolved persons to identify them or to record, in a targeted manner,items that are appropriate for indirectly identifying such persons.
(4) It is not permitted to: 1.record images in a data subject’s mostprivate sphere without the express consent of the data subject, 2.record images to monitor employees,  3.align with other personal data, in an automated manner without express consent and for creating personal profiles, personal data obtained fromimage recordings, or  4.analyse personal data obtained from image recordings on the basis of special categories of personal data (Article9 of the General Data ProtectionRegulation) as selection criteria.
(5) Data collected by means of permitted image recording may be transferredto the extent required, if one of the requirements of para.2 subparas.1 to 4 is met.Para.4 shall apply accordingly.
Special data security measures and warning sign
§13.(1) The controller shall take appropriate measures corresponding to therisk posed by an interference and ensure that unauthorised persons cannot access orsubsequently change the image recording.
(2) Except in the case of real-time surveillance, the controller shall keep logsof every processing operation.
(3) The controller shall erase personal data recorded if they are no longernecessary in relation to the purposes for which they were collected and if there is noother statutory obligation to maintain the data. Maintaining data for more than72hours must be proportionate; separate logs must kept of these data, and reasonsmust be stated.
(4) Paras.1 to 3 shall not be applied to image recordingspursuant to §12para.3 subpara.3.
(5) The controller of an image recording must appropriately mark therecording. The warning sign shall clearly specify the controller, unless the controlleris already known to the data subjects based on the circumstances of the case.
(6) The obligation to warning sign the data shall not apply in the cases referredto in §12 para.3 subpara.3 and, in particular cases, to processing operations thatmust be strictly limited in terms of time and whose purpose can exclusively beachieved by means of covert investigation, provided that the controller ensuresthereare sufficient safeguards for the data subjects’ interests, in particular by subsequentnotification of the data subject.
(7) If, in violation of para.5, sufficient information is not provided, every datasubject potentially affected by a processing operation can request information onthe identity of the controller from the owner of, or person authorised to use, the pieceof land or building or other property from which the processing operation evidentlyoriginates. Failure to provide such information without giving reasons shall bedeemed a refusal to provide access pursuant to Article15 of the General DataProtection Regulation.
Chapter 2
Bodies
Part 1
Data Protection Council
Establishment and duties
§14.(1) A Data Protection Council has been established at the FederalMinistry of Constitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulation and Justice. The DataProtection Council shall comment on questions of fundamental importance for dataprotection, promote the uniform further development of data protection, and advisethe Federal Government on legal policy in the case of projects relevant to dataprotection.
(2) To fulfil its duties pursuant to para.1, 1.the Data Protection Council can make recommendations relating to data protection to the Federal Government and the federal ministers; 2.the Data Protection Council can prepare opinions or commission such opinions; 3.the Data Protection Council shall be giventhe opportunity to comment on draft bills of federal ministries, insofar as these are significant for dataprotection law, and on regulations to be implemented by the FederalGovernment concerning essential issues of data protection; 4.the Data Protection Council shall have the right to request information and reports from public-sector controllers insofar as this is necessary toevaluate, from the viewpoint of data protection law, projects of significantimpact on data protection in Austria; 5.the Data Protection Council can publish its observations, concerns and suggestions and submit them to the public-sector controllers.
(3) Para.2 subparas.3 and 4 shall not apply insofar as internal affairs ofrecognised churches and religious communities are concerned.
Composition
§15.(1) The Data Protection Council shall have the following members: 1.representatives of the political parties: The political parties shall delegate twelve members according to the d’Hondt method in proportion to the seatsthey have in the Main Committee of the National Council. Every politicalparty represented in the Main Committee of the National Council has theright to be represented in the Data Protection Council. Aparty representedin the Main Committee of the National Council that cannot delegate amember according to the above calculation method can name a member; 2.one representative each of the Federal Chamber of Labour and the AustrianFederal Economic Chamber; 3.two representatives of the provinces; 4.one representative each of the Association of Austrian Municipalities and the Association of Austrian Cities and Towns; 5.one representative of the Federal Government to be delegated by the Federal Minister of Constitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulation andJustice; 6.one representative to be delegated by the Federal Government from among the data protection officers of the federal ministries; 7.two national or international experts in data protection to be named by the Data Protection Council after its constitution.
(2) The representatives mentioned in para.1 should have knowledge of andexperience in data protection law, Union law, and fundamental rights.
(3) For each member pursuant to para.1 subparas.1 to 6, a substitute membershall be delegated who shall replace the member if the member is incapacitated orunavailable. The Federal Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulationand Justice shall be notified in writing of the delegation of the members andsubstitute members.
(4) Members of the Federal Government or of a provincial government andstate secretaries as well as persons who may not be elected to the National Councilcannot be members of the Data Protection Council.
(5) The term of office of the members and substitute members pursuant topara.1 subparas.1 to 6 starts when they are delegated to the Data Protection Counciland ends 1.when they are dismissed by the entity or body delegating them (para.1) by means of a written notification to the Federal Ministry of ConstitutionalAffairs, Reforms, Deregulation and Justice, with a new member orsubstitute member being named at the same time, 2.whenthe member or substitute member announces his or her resignation by means of a written notification to the Federal Ministry of ConstitutionalAffairs, Reforms, Deregulation and Justice, or 3.no later than when a new Main Committee of the National Council is elected pursuant to §29 and §30 of theRules of Procedure Law of 1975,Federal Law Gazette No410/1975.
Subpara.3 shall not apply to members of the Data Protection Council namedpursuant to para.1 subpara.7.
(6) After the election of the new Main Committee of the National Council
(para.5 subpara.3), the previous Executive Board pursuant to §17 para.4 shallcontinue to manage the business of the Council until the constitutive meeting of thenewly appointed members and substitute members. The entities or bodies delegatingthe members and substitute members shall notify the Federal Ministry ofConstitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulation and Justice in writing within a period of two weeks of the election of the new Main Committee of the National Council ofthe members and substitute members, the number of whom must correspond topara.1. Reappointment of the members and substitute members is permitted.
(7) The constitutive meeting of the Data Protection Council shall take place nolater than six weeks after the election of the Main Committee of the NationalCouncil and shall be convened by the Federal Ministry of Constitutional Affairs,Reforms, Deregulation and Justice.
(8) The members and substitute members of the Data Protection Council shallserve in an honorary capacity. Members and substitute members of the DataProtection Council living outside of Vienna shall be entitled to receivecompensation for reasonable travel expenses according to the federal regulations ontravelling fees if they attend meetings of the Data Protection Council. The FederalMinistry of Constitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulation and Justiceshall orderreimbursements and refunds of the travel expenses to be paid every quarter inarrears.
Chair and management
§16.(1) The Data Protection Council shall adopt its rules of procedure by aresolution.
(2) In the constitutive meeting, the Data Protection Council shall elect, by asimple majority, a chair and two deputy chairs from among its members on the basisof the list of candidates proposed for election. Run-off elections are permitted. Thelist of candidates proposed for election shall be made known to the members andsubstitute members together with the invitation to the constitutive meeting. Re-election is permitted.
(3) The term of office of the chair and the deputy chairs ends 1.when the requirements of §15 para.5 subparas.1 to 3 are met, 2.when the chair or one of thedeputy chairs announces his or her resignation from his or her function by means of a declaration in the meeting of theData Protection Council or a written notification to the Federal Ministry ofConstitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulation and Justice,or 3.after the chair or one of the deputy chairs has been voted out of office by the Data Protection Council by a simple majority of the votes cast, with more than two thirds of its members or substitute members having to bepresent at the vote.
After the end of the term of office of the chair or one of the deputy chairs, a newchair or a new deputy chair shall be elected without delay.
(4) The chair elected pursuant to para.2 shall represent the Data ProtectionCouncil vis-á-vis third parties.
(5) The Federal Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulation andJustice shall be responsiblefor the management of the Data Protection Council. TheFederal Minister of Constitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulation and Justice shallsupply the necessary personnel for that purpose. While working for the DataProtection Council, the employees of theFederal Ministry of Constitutional Affairs,Reforms, Deregulation and Justice shall be bound by the instructions of the chair ofthe Data Protection Council with regard to their work.
Meetings and resolutions
§17.(1) The meetings of the Data Protection Council shall be convened by thechair whenever the need arises. Every member of the Data Protection Council canrequest in writing that the Data Protection Council be convened, stating therequested topic of discussion. If such a request has been made, the chair shallschedule a meeting that must take place no later than four weeks after receipt of therequest.
(2) Every member of the Data Protection Council must attend the meetings ofthe Data Protection Council unless the member is incapacitated or unavailable forjustifiable reasons. A substitute member shall attend a meeting only if a member isincapacitated or unavailable.
(3) Deliberations and resolutions of the Data Protection Council shall requirethe presence of more than half of its members or substitute members. Resolutionsshall be passed by a simple majority of votes cast. In the case of a parity of votes,the chair shall have a casting vote. An abstention from the vote is not permitted.Dissenting opinions are permitted.
(4) In urgent matters, the chair caninvite the deputy chairs and onerepresentative of each political party (§15 para.1 subpara.1) to attend anextraordinary meeting (Executive Board).
(5) The Data Protection Council may establish permanent or non-permanentworking groups from among its members which it may entrust with the preparation, appraisal and handling of specific issues. The Data Protection Council may alsodelegate themanagement, pre-appraisal and handling of specific issues to anindividual member (rapporteur).
(6) The head of the Data Protection Authority shall have the right to attend themeetings of the Data Protection Council or its working groups. The head of the DataProtection Authority shall not have a voting right.
(7) If required, the chair can ask experts to attend the meetings of the DataProtection Council or the working groups. The chair of the DataProtection Councilcan also ask experts in the relevant field to assist in preparing meetings of the DataProtection Council or of working groups if this is required to clarify issues of specialsignificance for data protection.
(8) The deliberations of the Data Protection Council shall not be public unlessthe Data Protection Council itself decides otherwise. The members and substitutemembers of the Data Protection Council, the head and deputy head of the DataProtection Authority, and the experts asked to attend meetings are obliged to keepconfidential all facts that have become known to them exclusively on the basis oftheir activities in the Data Protection Council.
Part 2
Data Protection Authority
Establishment
§18.(1) The Data Protection Authority is established as a national supervisoryauthority pursuant to Article51 of the General Data Protection Regulation.
(2) The Data Protection Authority is managedby its head. If the head is absent,his or her deputy shall manage the Data Protection Authority. The rules regardingthe head of the Data Protection Authority shall also apply to the deputy.
Independent status
§19.(1) The Data Protection Authority acts as an authority supervising staffand as a human resource department. (2) During his or her term of office, the head must not exercise any function that
1.could cast doubt on the independent exercise of his or her office or impartiality,2.prevents him or her from performing their professional duties, or 3.puts essential official interests at risk.
The head is required to report functions that he or she exercises alongside his or heroffice as the head of the Data Protection Authority to the Federal Minister ofConstitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulation and Justice without delay.
(3) The Federal Minister of Constitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulation andJustice can request information from the head of the Data Protection Authority onmatters to be dealt with by the Authority. The head of theData Protection Authorityhas to meet this request only insofar as it does not impair the complete independenceof the supervisory authority as described in Article52 of the General DataProtection Regulation.
The head of the Data Protection Authority
§20.(1) The head of the Data Protection Authority is appointed for a term offive years by the Federal President on the basis of a proposal by the FederalGovernment; re-appointment is permitted. The proposal is to be preceded by anadvertisement for the position permitting general applications.
(2) The head of the Data Protection Authority must 1.have completed alaw degree, 2.have the necessary personal and professional aptitude through prior education and appropriate professional experience in the matters to behandled by the Data Protection Authority, 3.possess an excellent knowledge of Austrian data protection law, Union law and fundamental rights, and 4.have at least five years of professional experience in the legal field.
(3) The following persons may not be appointed head of the Data ProtectionAuthority: 1.members of the Federal Government, state secretaries, members of a provincial government, members of the National Council, the FederalCouncil or any other general representative body or of the EuropeanParliament, as well as members of the Ombudsman Board, and thepresident of the Court of Audit; 2.persons who have held one of the positions listed in subpara.1 in the last two years; 3.persons who may not be elected to the National Council.
(4) The head of the Data Protection Authority shall be dismissed by the FederalPresidenton the basis of a proposal by the Federal Government.
(5) The deputy head of the Data Protection Authority is appointed for a term offive years by the Federal President on the basis of a proposal by the FederalGovernment in accordance with paras.1 to 3. Para.4 applies to the dismissalof thedeputy.
Tasks
§21.(1) At their request, the Data Protection Authority advises the committeesof the NationalCouncil and the Federal Council, the Federal Government and theprovincial governments on legislative and administrative measures. Before federallaws as well as regulations to be implemented by the Federal Government thatdirectly concern issues of data protection law are adopted, the Federal DataProtection Authority shall be consulted.
(2) The Data Protection Authority shall make public, by way of a regulation inthe Federal Law Gazette, the lists pursuant to Article35 paras.4 and 5 of theGeneral Data Protection Regulation.
(3) The Data Protection Authority shall make public, by way of a regulation,the criteria to be specified pursuant to Article57 para.1 (p) of the General DataProtection Regulation. At the same time, the Data Protection Authority shall serveas the only national accreditation body pursuant to Article43 para.1 (a) of theGeneral Data Protection Regulation.
Powers
§22.(1) The Data ProtectionAuthority can request from the controller or theprocessor of the examined processing all necessary clarifications and inspect dataprocessing activities and relevant documents. The controller or processor shallrender the necessary assistance. Supervisory activities are to be exercised in a waythat least interferes with the rights of the controller or processor and third parties.
(2) For purposes of the inspection, the Data Protection Authority shall have theright, after having informed the owner of the premises and the controller orprocessor, to enter rooms where data processing operations are carried out, put dataprocessing equipment into operation, carry out the processing operations to beexamined and make copies of the storage media to the extent strictly necessary toexercise its supervisorypowers.
(3) Information acquired by the Data Protection Authority or personsauthorised by it during any examination shall be used only for supervisory purposesin the context of the execution of data protection regulations. Incidentally, theobligation of confidentiality also exists before courts and administrative authorities,in particular fiscal authorities, with the reservation that, if the inspection leads to thesuspicion that a crime pursuant to §63 of this federal law or pursuant to §118a,§119, §119a, §126a to §126c, §148a or§278a of the Criminal Code, FederalLaw Gazette No60/1974, or any crime punishable with more than five years ofimprisonment has been committed, this shall be reported to the police, and requestspursuant to §76 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Federal Law GazetteNo631/1975, regarding such crimes and offences shall also be complied with.
(4) In case a data processing operation causes serious immediate danger to theinterests of confidentiality of the data subject which deserve protection (imminentdanger), the Data Protection Authority may prohibit the continuation of the dataprocessing operation by an administrative decision pursuant to §57 para.1 of the
General Administrative Procedure Act1991, Federal Law Gazette No51/1991. Thecontinuation may also be prohibited only partially if this seems technically possible,meaningful with regard to the purpose of the data processing operation andsufficient to eliminate the danger. At the request of a data subject, the DataProtection Authority can also order, by an administrative decision pursuant to §57para.1 of the General Administrative Procedure Act, the restriction of processingpursuant to Article18 of the General Data Protection Regulation if the controllerdoes not comply with an obligation to that effect within the period specified. Ifprohibition is not complied with immediately, the Data Protection Authority shallproceed pursuant to Article83 para.5 of the General Data Protection Regulation.
(5) As part of its responsibilities, the Data Protection Authority is responsiblefor imposing administrative fines on natural and legal persons.
(6) If, with regard to a claim based on §29 by a data subject represented by abody, organisation or association as referred to in Article80 para.1 of the GeneralData Protection Regulation, there are doubts whether the relevant criteria have beenmet, the Data Protection Authority shall, at the request of the court where the claimis filed, make appropriate findings in an administrative decision. Such body,organisation or association shall have the position of a party in the proceedings. It has the right to lodge a complaint against a negative declaratory decision with the Federal Administrative Court.
Activity reports and the publication of decisions
§23.(1) The Data Protection Authority shall prepare an activity reportcomplying with Article59 of the General Data Protection Regulation by 31Marchof every year and submit it to the Federal Ministerof Constitutional Affairs,Reforms, Deregulation and Justice. The Federal Minister of Constitutional Affairs,Reforms, Deregulation and Justice shall submit the report to the FederalGovernment, the National Council and the Federal Council. The Data ProtectionAuthority shall make the report accessible to the public, the European Commission,the European Data Protection Board (Article68 of the General Data ProtectionRegulation) and the Data Protection Council.
(2) Decisions made by the Data Protection Authority which are of fundamentalimportance to the general public shall be published by the Data Protection Authorityin an appropriate manner while respecting official secrecy rules.
Part 3
Remedies, liability and penalties
Complaints with the Data Protection Authority
§24.(1) Every data subject has the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority if the data subject is of the opinion that the processing of thepersonal data concerning the data subject infringes the General Data ProtectionRegulationor §1or Chapter1, Article2.
(2) The complaint must contain:1.the description of the right considered to have been infringed, 2.to the extent reasonable, the description of the legal entity or the executivebody or officer that is deemed to be responsible for thealleged infringement(respondent to the complaint),3.the facts from which the infringement is derived, 4.thereasons for which the unlawfulness is alleged, 5.the request to find that the alleged infringement has been committed, and 6.the details which are necessary in order to decide whether the complaint has been lodged in due time.
(3) A complaint must be accompanied by the request on which it is based andthe answer of the respondent to the complaint, if any. In the case of a complaint, theData Protection Authority shall provide further assistance on request of the datasubject.
(4) The right to have a complaintdealt with expires if the intervening partydoes not lodge the complaint within a year after having gained knowledge of theincident that gave rise to the complaint, but no later than within three years after theincident allegedly occurred. Late complaints shall be rejected.
(5) To theextent the complaint is shown to be justified, it is to be granted. Ifan infringement can be attributed to a private-sector controller, the controller shallbe instructed to comply with the complainant’s requests for information,rectification, erasure, restriction or data communication to the extent required toeliminate the infringement that has been found to exist. To the extent that thecomplaint is not found to be justified, it shall be rejected.
(6) A respondent to the complaint cansubsequently eliminate the allegedinfringement until the end of the proceedings before the Data Protection Authorityby complying with the complainant’s requests. If the Data Protection Authoritydeems the complaint to be settled thereby, it shall hear the complainant on this.Simultaneously, the complainant is to be informed that the Data ProtectionAuthority will informally end the proceedings unless the complainant states reasons,within a reasonable period, why the complainant still considers the originallyalleged infringement or at least parts of it as not having been eliminated. If such astatement by the complainant modifies the merits of the case (§13 para.8 of theGeneral Administrative Procedure Act), the original complaint is to be deemedwithdrawn and simultaneously a new complaint to be deemed lodged. In this casethe original complaint procedure is also to be ended informally and the complainantis to be informed thereof. Late statements are to be ignored.
(7) The data subject shall be informed by the Data Protection Authority of theprogress and the outcome of the investigation within three months of filing thecomplaint.
(8)Each data subject can apply to the Federal Administrative Court if the DataProtection Authority does not handle a complaint or does not inform the data subjectwithin three months of the progress or outcome of the complaint lodged.
(9) To the extent required, the Data Protection Authority can engage officialexperts to assist in the proceedings.
(10) The term allowed for the decision pursuant to §73 of the GeneralAdministrative Procedure Act shall not include:
1.the time during which proceedings are suspended until a final decision on a preliminary issue has been made; 2.the duration of proceedings pursuant to Articles56, 60 and 63 of the General Data Protection Regulation. 
Accompanying measures in the complaint procedure
§25.(1) If, in the context of a complaint, the complainant satisfactorilydemonstrates a serious infringement of his or her interests in confidentiality whichdeserve protection due to the processing of the complainant’s personal data, the DataProtection Authority may proceed according to§22 para.4.
(2) If the correctness of personal data is disputed in proceedings, the respondentto the complaint shall submit, by the end of the proceedings, a note stating that thecorrectness is disputed. If required, the Data Protection Authority shall order, by anadministrative decision pursuant to §57 para.1 of the General AdministrativeProcedure Act, such note to be submitted at the request of the complainant.
(3) If a controller invokes a restriction pursuant to Article23 of the GeneralData Protection Regulation in relation to the Data Protection Authority, the DataProtection Authority shall examine the lawfulness of the application of therestrictions. If the Data Protection Authority comes to the conclusion that it was notjustified in keeping the processed personal data secret from the data subject, thedisclosure of the data shall be ordered by an administrative decision. If theadministrative decision by the Data Protection Authorityis not complied with withineight weeks, the Data Protection Authority shall disclose the personal data to thedata subject and shall communicate to the data subject the desired information orinform the data subject of the personal data that have alreadybeen rectified orerased.
(4) Administrative decisions that permit the transfer of data abroad shall berevoked once the legal or factual prerequisites for the issue of the permit no longerapply.
Public-sector andprivate-sector controllers
§26.(1) Without prejudice to §5 para.3, public-sector controllers are allcontrollers 1.that are established in legal structures of public law, in particular also as an executive officer of a territorial authority, or 2.as far as they execute laws despite having been incorporated according to private law. (2) Public-sector controllers have the status of a party in proceedings beforethe Data Protection Authority. (3) Public-sector controllers can lodge complaints with the FederalAdministrative Court and final complaints with the Supreme Administrative Court. (4) Controllers which are not within the scope of para.1 are considered to beprivate-sector controllers according to this federal law.
Complaints with the FederalAdministrative Court
§27.(1) The Federal Administrative Court shall decide through a panel ofjudges on complaints against administrative decisions on the ground of a breach ofthe duty to provide information pursuant to §24 para.7 and the duty to reach adecision of the Data Protection Authority.
(2) The panel of judges shall consist of a chair and one expert lay judge eachfrom among employers and from among employees. The expert lay judges shall beappointed on the basis of a proposal by the Austrian Federal Economic Chamberand the Federal Chamber of Labour. Appropriate arrangements shall be made sothat a sufficient number of expert lay judges is available in due time.
(3) The expert lay judges must have at least five years of relevant professionalexperience and special knowledge of data protection law.
(4) The chair shall provide all documents relevant to the decision to the expertlay judges without delay, or, if this is impractical or strictly necessary tosafeguardthe confidentiality of the documents, make them available in some other way.
(5) Where proceedings are brought against an administrative decision of theData Protection Authority which was preceded by an opinion or a decision of the European Data Protection Board in the consistency mechanism, the Data ProtectionAuthority shall forward that opinion or decision to the Federal Administrative Court.
Representationof data subjects
§28.The data subject shall have the right to mandate a not-for-profit body,organisation or association which has been properly constituted, has statutoryobjectives which are in the public interest, and is active in the field of the protectionof data subjects’ rights and freedoms with regard to the protection of their personaldata to lodge the complaint on his or her behalf and to exercise the rights referred toin §24 to §27 on his or her behalf.
Right to compensationand liability
§29.(1)Pursuant to Article82 of the General Data Protection Regulation, anyperson who has suffered material or non-material damage as a result of aninfringement of the General Data Protection Regulation or §1 or Chapter1 Article2shall have the right to receive compensation from the controller or processor for thedamage suffered. In detail, the generalprovisions of civil law shall apply to thisright to compensation.
(2) The regional court entrusted with exercising jurisdiction in civil matters inwhose judicial district the plaintiff (applicant) has his usual place of residence orregistered office shall have first-instance jurisdiction over actions for compensation.Actions (requests)may, however, also be brought before the regional court in whosejudicial district the defendant has his usual place of residence or registered office ora branch office.
General conditions for imposing administrative fines
§30.(1) The Data Protection Authority can impose administrative fines on alegal person if infringements of provisions ofthe General Data ProtectionRegulation and of §1 or Chapter1 Article2 were committed by persons who actedeither individually or as part of an executive body of the legal person and have aleading position within the legal person on the basis of:1.a power of representation of the legal person, 2.the authority to take decisions on behalf of the legal person, or 3.the authority to exercise control within the legal person.
(2) Legal persons may also be held responsible for infringements of provisionsof the General Data Protection Regulation and of §1 or Chapter1 Article2 if suchinfringements by a person acting for the legal person were made possible by a lackof supervision or control by one of the persons referred to in para.1 unless the actconstitutes a criminal offence within the jurisdiction of the courts.
(3) The Data Protection Authority shall refrain from imposing a fine on aresponsible party pursuant to §9 of theAdministrative Penal Act1991, Federal LawGazette52/1991, if an administrative penalty has already been imposed on the legalperson for the same infringement.
(4) Administrative fines imposed pursuant to §22 para.5 shall be received bythe Federal Government and shall be collected pursuant to the provisions on thecollection of judicial fines. Final administrative decisions by the Data ProtectionAuthority are writs of enforcement. Approval and implementation of enforcementis to be requested on the basisof the writ of enforcement by the Data ProtectionAuthority from the district court in whose judicial district the obligated party has hisor her general place of jurisdiction (§66 and §75 of the Court Jurisdiction Act,Imperial Law Gazette No111/1895)or from the enforcing court referred to in §18and §19 of the Enforcement Code.
(5) Administrative fines cannot be imposed on authorities and public entities,such as, in particular, entities established in a form provided by public law as wellas private law, which act on the basis of a statutory mandate, and on corporationsunder public law.
Part 4
Supervisory authority pursuant to Directive(EU)2016/680
Data Protection Authority
§31.(1) The Data Protection Authority is established as a national supervisoryauthority for the scope referred to in §36 para.1. The Data Protection Authorityshall not be competent to superviseprocessing operations of courts acting in theirjudicial capacity.
(2) In respect of independence, general provisions and the establishment of thesupervisory authority, Articles52, 53 and 54 of the General Data ProtectionRegulation and §18 para.2, §19 and §20 shall apply accordingly.
Tasks of the Data Protection Authority
§32.(1) In the scope of §36 para.1, the Data Protection Authority shall 1.monitor and enforce the application of §1 and of the provisions adopted pursuant to Chapter3 and the implementing measures regarding Directive (EU) 2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to theprocessing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of theprevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences orthe execution of criminal penalties, and on the free movement of such data,and repealing Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA, OJ NoL119of 4May2016, p.89; 2.promote public awareness and understanding of the risks, rules, safeguards and rights in relation to processing; 3.perform the tasks specified in Article57 para.1 (c) to (e), (g), (h) and (t) of the General Data Protection Regulation with regard to Chapter3; 4.deal with complaints lodged by a data subject, or by a body, organisation or association in accordance with §28, and investigate, to the extentappropriate, the subject matter of the complaint and inform the complainantof the progress and the outcome of the investigation within a period of threemonths, in particular if further investigation or coordination with anothersupervisory authority is necessary; 5.check the lawfulness of processing pursuant to§42 para.8, and inform the data subject within a reasonable period of the outcome of the checkpursuant to §42 para.9 or of the reasons why the check has not been carriedout; 6.monitor relevant developments insofar as they have an impact on the protection of personal data, in particular the development of informationand communication technologies; 7.provide advice on the processing operations referred to in §53; and 8.exercise the rights of data subjects in the cases referred to in §43 para.4, §44 para.3 and §45 para.4.
(2)The Data Protection Authority shall facilitate the submission of complaintsreferred to in para.1 subpara.4 by measures such as a complaint submission form which can also be completed electronically, without excluding other means ofcommunication.
(3) Article57 paras.3 and 4 of the General Data Protection Regulation shall apply accordingly.
Powers of the Data Protection Authority
§33.(1) In the scope of §36 para.1, the Data Protection Authority shall havethe effective investigative powers required to perform its tasks. Such powersinclude, in particular, the powers referred to in §22 para.2.
(2) In the scope of §36 para.1, the Data Protection Authority shall have theeffective corrective powers required to perform its tasks. These include the powersto enable the Data Protection Authority 1.to issue warnings to a controller or processor that intended processing operations are likely to infringe provisions adopted in the scope of Directive (EU) 2016/680; 2.to order the controller or processor to bring processing operations into compliance with the provisions adopted inthe scope of Directive (EU)2016/680 in a specified manner and within a specified period, inparticular by ordering the rectification or erasure of personal data or therestriction of processing pursuant to §45; 3.to impose a temporary or definitive limitation including a ban on processing.
(3)In the scope of §36 para.1, the Data Protection Authority haseffectiveadvisory powers required for implementation which allow it to advise the controllerin accordance with the prior consultation procedure referred to in §53 and to issue,on its own initiative or on request, opinions to the National Council or theFederalCouncil, the Federal Government or a provincial government or to other institutionsand bodies as well as to the public on any issue related to the protection of personaldata. 
(4) In the scope of §36 para.1, the exercise of the powers conferred on thesupervisory authority is based on Article58 para.4 of the General Data ProtectionRegulation. 
(5) §22 para.3 sentence 2 shall apply accordingly to infringements in the scopeof §36 para.1
General provisions
§34.(1) In the scope of §36 para.1, controllers shall put in place effectivemechanisms to encourage confidential reporting of infringements. For this purpose,controllers shall, inparticular, establish adequate procedures that enable reports ofinfringements of the provisions of Chapter3 to an appropriate entity.
(2) The mechanisms referred to in para.1 shall at leastinclude 1.specific procedures for the receipt of reports on infringements and their follow-up; 2.protection of personal data concerning both the person who reports the infringements and the natural person who is presumably responsible for aninfringement; 3.clear rules to guarantee that the identity of the person who reported the infringement is not disclosed, unless such disclosure of identity isobligatory in relation to public prosecution, court or administrativeproceedings.
(3) In its activity report pursuant to §23, the Data Protection Authority shallreport on its activities pursuant to Parts4 and 5. The requirements of Article59 ofthe General Data Protection Regulation and §23 forthe activity report and thepublication of decisions shall apply accordingly.
(4) Article61 paras.1 to 7 of the General DataProtection Regulation shallapply accordingly to mutual assistance in the scope of §36 para.1.
(5) In thescope of §36 para.1, the provisions of Chapter2 Part3, with theexception of §30, shall apply accordingly.
Part 5
Special powers of the Data Protection Authority
§35.(1) The Data Protection Authority shall safeguard data protection inaccordance with the detailed provisions of the General Data Protection Regulationand this federal law.
(2)(Constitutional provision)The Data Protection Authority shall exerciseits powers also in relation to the highest governing bodies or officers referred to inArticle19 of theFederal Constitutional Lawentrusted with implementing the lawsas well as in relation to the highest governing bodies or officers referred to inArticle30 paras.3 to 6, Article125, Article134 para.8 and Article148h paras.1and 2 of the Federal Constitutional Act in the administrative matters for which theyare responsible.
Chapter 3
Processing ofpersonal data for purposes of the security police,including the protection of public security by the police, the protection of military facilities by the armed forces, the resolution and prosecution of criminal offences, the enforcement of sentences andthe enforcement of precautionary measures involving the deprivation of liberty
Part 1
General provisions
Scope of application, and definitions
§36.(1)The provisions of this Chapter apply to the processing of personaldata by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation,detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties,including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security,and for the purposes of national security, intelligence, and the protection of militaryfacilities by the armed forces.
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter: 1.“personal data” means any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person (“data subject”); an identifiable natural person isone who can be identified, directly or indirectly, in particular by referenceto an identifier such as a name, an identification number, location data, anonline identifier or to one or more factors specific to the physical,physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of thatnatural person; 2.“processing” means any operation or set of operations which is performed
on personal data or on sets of personal data, whether or not by automatedmeans, such as collection, recording, organisation, structuring, storage,adaptation or alteration, retrieval,consultation, use, disclosure bytransmission, dissemination or otherwise making available, alignment orcombination, restriction, erasure or destruction; 3.“restriction of processing” means the marking of stored personal data with the aim of limiting their processing in the future; 4.“profiling” means any form of automated processing of personal data consisting of the use of personal data to evaluate certain personal aspectsrelating to a natural person, in particular to analyse or predict aspectsconcerning that natural person’s performance at work, economic situation,health, personal preferences, interests, reliability, behaviour, location ormovements; 5.“pseudonymisation” means the processing of personal data in such a manner that the personal data can no longer be attributed to a specific datasubject without the use of additional information, provided that suchadditional information is kept separately and is subject to technical andorganisational measures to ensure that the personal data are not attributedto an identified or identifiable natural person; 6.“filing system” means any structured set of personal data which are accessible according to specific criteria, whether centralised, decentralised or dispersed on a functional or geographical basis; 7.“competent authority” means a)any public authority competent for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminalpenalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention ofthreats to public security, nationalsecurity, intelligence, or the protectionof military facilities by the armed forces; or  b)any other body or entity entrusted by Member State law to exercise public authority and public powers for the purposes of the prevention,investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or theexecution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against andthe prevention of threats to public security, national security,intelligence, or the protection of military facilities by the armed forces; 8.“controller” means the competent authority which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personaldata; 9.“processor” means a natural or legal person, public authority,agency or other body which processes personal data on behalf of the controller;
10.“recipient” means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body, to which the personal data are disclosed, whethera third partyor not. However, public authorities which may receive personal data in theframework of a particular inquiry in accordance with laws shall not beregarded as recipients; the processing of those data by those publicauthorities shall be in compliance with the applicable data protection rulesaccording to the purposes of the processing; 11.“personal data breach” means a breach of security leading to the accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, oraccess to, personal data transmitted, stored or otherwise processed; 12.“genetic data” means personal data relating to the inherited or acquired
genetic characteristics of a natural person which give unique informationabout the physiology or the health of that natural person and which result,in particular, from an analysis of a biological sample from the naturalperson in question; 13.“biometric data” means personal data resulting from specific technical processing relating to the physical, physiological or behaviouralcharacteristics of a natural person, which allow or confirm the uniqueidentification of that natural person, such as facial images or dactyloscopicdata; 14.“data concerning health” means personal data relatedto the physical or mental health of a natural person, including the provision of health care services, which reveal information about his or her health status; 15.“supervisory authority” means theData Protection Authority; 16.“international organisation” means an organisation and its subordinate bodies governed by public international law, or any other body which is set up by, or on the basis of, an agreement between two or more countries.
Principles for processing, classification and data quality
§37.(1) Personal data shall be: 1.processed lawfully and fairly; 2.collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and not processed in a manner that is incompatible with those purposes; 3.adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are processed; 4.accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date; every reasonable step must be taken to ensure that personal data that are inaccurate, having regard tothe purposes for which they are processed, are erased or rectified withoutdelay; 5.kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which they are processed; 6.processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security of the personal data, including protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing andagainst accidental loss, destruction or damage, using appropriatetechnicalor organisational measures.
(2) §38 shall apply to processing for archiving purposes in the public interest,scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes in the scope of §36para.1.
(3) The controller shall be responsible for, and be able to demonstratecompliance with, paras.1 and 2.
(4) As far as possible and reasonable, a clear distinction between personal dataof different categories of data subjects, such as the following, shall be made: 1.persons who, on the basis of certain facts, are specifically suspected of having committed a criminal offence,2.persons with regard to whom, on the basis of certain facts, there are serious grounds for believing that they are about to commit a criminal offence, 3.persons convicted of a criminal offence;4.victims of a criminal offence or persons with regard to whomcertain facts give rise to reasons for believing that they are the victims of a criminaloffence, and 5.other persons connected to a criminal offence, such as persons who might be called on to testify, persons who can provide information on criminaloffences, or contacts or associates of one of the persons referred to insubparas.1 to 3.
(5) Personal data based on facts are to be distinguished, as far as possible, frompersonal data based on personal assessments. Personal data based on personalassessments must be marked accordingly, and reasons can be added to facilitate theunderstanding of an assessment.
(6) Incorrect or incomplete personal data, personal data that are no longercurrent or are to be erased must neither be transferred nor made available forautomated retrieval from filing systems. For that purpose, the authority shall check the data quality accordingly as far as possible before a transmission. Personal datakept ready for automated retrieval must be kept complete and up to date at all times.
(7) As far as possible, the information required for the recipient to assess theup-to-dateness, correctness, completeness and reliability of the personal data shallbe added in any transmission of personal data.
(8) If it is found ex officio or following notification by a data subject thatpersonal data that do not comply with the requirements of para.6 have beentransmitted, the transmitting administrative office and authority, or theadministrative office and authority keeping the filing system shall notify thereceiving office or authority thereof without delay. The receiving office or authorityshall immediately erase data which have been unlawfully transmitted, rectifyincorrect data, complete incomplete data or restrict processing without delay.
(9) If the receiving administrative office or authority has reason to believe thatthe personal data transmitted are incorrect or not up to date or would have to beerased, or that their processing would have to be restricted, the receivingadministrative office or authority shall notify the transmitting administrative officeor authority thereof without delay. The lattershall take the required measureswithout delay.
Lawfulness of processing
§38.Unless it is required to protect the vital interests ofa person, processingis lawful only to the extent it is provided for by laws or by directly applicable legalprovisions that have the status of laws in Austria and is required and proportionateto fulfil a task performed by the competent authority for thepurposes referred to in§36 para.1.
Processing of special categories of personal data
§39.Processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, politicalopinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union membership, and theprocessing of genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying anatural person,data concerning health or data concerning a natural person's sex lifeor sexual orientation for the purposes referred to in §36 para.1 shall be allowedonly where strictly necessary and if effective measures to protect the rights andfreedoms of the datasubjects are taken and 1.where authorised pursuant to §38, or  2.where such processing relatesto data which are manifestly made public by the data subject.
Processing for other purposes, and transfer
§40.(1) Processing of personal data pursuant to the provisions of this Chapterby the same or another controller for a purpose other than the one for which the datawere collected shall be allowed only if this other purpose is coveredby the scope of§36 para.1 and the requirements of §38 and §39 are met.
(2) Transferring personal data processed pursuant to the provisions of thisChapter for a purpose not referred to in §36 para.1 shall be allowed only if this isexpressly provided for by laws or by directly applicable legal provisions that havethe status of laws inAustria, and the recipient is authorised to process these personaldata for such other purpose.
(3) If the processing of personal data is subject to special conditions, thetransmitting competent authority shall inform the recipient of the personal data thatsuch conditions apply and must be complied with. Transfers to recipients in otherMember States or to bodies, offices and agencies established pursuant to TitleVChapters4 and 5 of the TFEU must not be subject to conditions that do not apply todomestic data transmissions as well.
Automated individual decision-making
§41.(1) Decisions based solely on automated processing, including profiling,which have negative legal consequences for the data subject or can significantlyaffect the data subject, shall be allowed only to the extent they are expresslyprovided for by laws or by directly applicable legal provisions that have the statusof laws in Austria.
(2) Decisions referred to in para.1 shall not be based on special categories ofpersonal data referred to in §39 unless effective measures to safeguard the datasubject’s rights and freedoms and legitimate interests are in place.
(3) Decisions pursuant to para.1 that have the consequence that natural personsare discriminated against on the basis of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade unionmembership, genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying anatural person, data concerning health or data concerning a natural person’s sex lifeor sexual orientation shall be prohibited.
Part 2
Rights of the data subject
Principles
§42.(1)The controller shall provide any information and make anycommunication with regard to §43 to §45 relating to processing to the data subjectin as concise, intelligible and easily accessible a form as possible, using clear andplain language. The information shall be transmitted in an appropriate manner, inthe case of a request in the same form asthe request, if possible.
(2) The controller shall facilitate the exercise of the rights of the data subjectpursuant to §43to 45.
(3) The controller shall inform the data subject in writing about the follow-upto his or her request without undue delay.
(4) The controller shall provide the data subject with information on measurestaken because of a request pursuant to §44 to §45 without delay, but in any eventwithin one month after receipt of the request. That period may be extended by twofurther months where necessary, taking into account the complexity and number ofthe requests. The controller shall inform the data subject of any such extensionwithin one month of receipt of the request, together with the reasons for the delay.Where the data subject makes the request by electronic means, the information shallbe provided by electronic means where possible, unless otherwise requested by thedata subject.
(5)If the controller does not take action on the request of the data subject, thecontroller shall inform the data subject without delay and at the latest within onemonth of receipt of the request of the reasons for not taking action and on thepossibility of lodging a complaint with a supervisory authority and seeking a judicialremedy.
(6)Information provided under §43 and any communication and any actiontaken under §44 and 45 shall be provided free of charge. Where requests from adata subject are manifestly unfounded or excessive, in particular because of theirrepetitive character, the controller may either: 1.charge a reasonable fee taking into account the administrative costs of
providing the information or communication or taking the action requested,or 2.refuse to act on the request.
The controller shall bear the burden of demonstrating the manifestlyunfounded orexcessive character of the request.
(7) The controller may request the provision of additional informationnecessary to confirm the identity of the person who submitted a request pursuant to§44 or §45.
(8) In the cases referred to in §43 para.4, §44 para.3 and §45 para.4, thedata subject is entitled to request verification of the lawfulness of the relevantrestriction of the data subject’s rights by the Data Protection Authority. Thecontroller shall inform the data subject of this right.
(9) Where the right referred to in para.8 is exercised, the Data ProtectionAuthority shall inform the data subject at least that all necessary verifications orareview by the Data Protection Authority have taken place. In addition, the DataProtection Authority shall inform the data subject of the data subject’s right to lodgecomplaints with the Federal Administrative Court.
Information of the data subject
§43.(1) The controller shall make available to the data subject at least thefollowing information: 1.the identity and the contact details of the controller; 2.the contact details of the data protection officer, whereapplicable; 3.the purposes of the processing for which the personal data are intended; 4.the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority and the contact details of the supervisory authority; 5.the existence of the right to request from the controller access to and rectification or erasure of personal data and restriction of processing of thepersonal data concerning the data subject.
(2) In addition to the information referred to in para.1, the controller shall giveto the data subject, in specific cases, the following further information to enable theexercise of his or her rights: 1.the legal basis for the processing;2.the period for which the personal data will be stored, or ifthat is not possible, the criteria used to determine that period; 3.where applicable, the categoriesof recipients of the personal data, including in third countries or international organisations; 4.where necessary, further information, in particular where the personal data are collected without the knowledge of the data subject.
(3) Where personal data are collected from the data subject, the datasubjectmust be in possession of the information pursuant to the requirements of paras.1and 2 at the time of the collection of the personal data. In all other cases, Article14para.3 of the General Data Protection Regulation shall apply. The informationaccording to paras.1 and 2 may be omitted where data have not been collected byasking the data subject, but through transmission from another application purposeof the same controller or from a data application of another controller, and wherethe processing is provided for by law.
(4) The provisionof the information to the data subject pursuant to para.2 canbe delayed, restricted or omitted to the extent this is strictly necessary andproportionate in a particular case to 1.avoid prejudicing the prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, in particular byobstructing inquiries, investigations or proceedings of authorities or courts, 2.protect public security,3.protect national security, 4.protect the constitutional institutions of the Republic of Austria, 5.enable the protection of military facilities by the armed forces, or 6.protect the rights and freedoms of others.
Right of access by the data subject
§44.(1) Every data subject has the right to obtain from the controllerconfirmation as to whether or not personal data concerning him or her are beingprocessed, and, where that is the case, access to the personal data and the followinginformation: 1.the purposes of and legal basis for the processing, 2.the categories of personal data concerned, 3.the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the personal data have been disclosed, in particular recipients in third countries or internationalorganisations, 4.if possible, the period for which the personal data are planned to be stored, or if that is not possible, the criteria used to determine that period, 5.the existence of the right to request from the controller rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing of personal dataconcerning the data subject, 6.the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority and the contactdetails of the Data Protection Authority, and 7.communication of the personal data undergoing processing and of any available information as to their origin. (2) Restrictions of the right of access are permitted only on the conditionsreferred to in §43 para.4. (3) In case access is not granted pursuant to para.2, the controller shall informthe data subject, without undue delay, in writing of any refusal or restriction ofaccess and of the reasons for the refusal or the restriction. Such information may beomitted where the provision thereof would undermine a purpose under §43 para.4.The controller shall inform the data subject of the possibility to lodge a complaintwith the Data Protection Authority. (4) The controller shall document the reasons for the decision not to grantaccess pursuant to para.2. That information shall bemade available to the DataProtection Authority.(5) To the extent that a data processing operation is, by law, open to inspectionby a data subject with regard to data processed on the data subject, the data subjectshall have a right of access in accordance with the provisions granting the right ofinspection. The detailed provisions of the law granting the right of inspection shallapply to the procedure of inspection (and its refusal). Parts of information accordingto para.1 that are not covered by the right of inspection may, however, be assertedaccording to this federal law.
Right to rectification or erasureof personal data and to the restriction of processing
§45.(1) Every data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controllerwithout undue delay the rectification of inaccurate personal data concerning him orher and the completion of incomplete personal data. Where necessary, the personaldata can be rectified or completed by means of a supplementary statement if laterchanges are incompatible with the documentation purpose. It shall be the obligationof thecontroller to prove that the data are correct unless the personal data have beencollected exclusively based on statements made by the data subject.
(2) The controller shall erase the personal data on the controller’s own initiativeor at the request of the data subject if 1.the personal data are no longer necessary in relation to the purposes for
which they were collected or otherwise processed, 2.the personal datahave been unlawfully processed, 3.erasure is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the
controller is subject. 
(3) Instead of erasure, the controller shall restrict processing where: 1.the accuracy of the personal data is contested by the data subject and their accuracy or inaccuracy cannot be ascertained, or 2.the personal data must be maintained for the purposes of evidence to perform a task delegated to the controller by law.
In the case of a restriction pursuant to subpara.1, the controller shall inform the datasubject before the restriction is lifted.
(4)The controller shall inform the data subject in writing of any refusal ofrectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing and of thereasons for the refusal. The controller shall inform the data subject of the possibilityto lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority.
(5) The controller shall communicate the rectification of inaccurate personaldata to the competent authority from which the inaccurate personal data originate.
(6) Where personal data has been rectified or erased or processing has beenrestricted pursuant to paras.1 to 3, the controller shall notify all recipientsof thepersonal data concerned. The recipients shall rectify or erase the personal data orrestrict processing of the personal data under their responsibility without unduedelay.
Part 3
Controller and processor
Obligations of the controller
§46.The controller shall comply with the obligations referred to in Article24paras.1 and 2 and Article25 paras.1 and 2 of the General Data ProtectionRegulation with regard to the compliance of processing with the provisions of thisChapter.
Joint controllers
§47.Two or more controllers who jointly determine the purposes and meansof processing shall be joint controllers.They shall, in a transparent manner,determine their respective responsibilities under this federal law, in particular asregards the exercising of the rights of the data subject and their respective duties toprovide the information referred to in §43, by means of an arrangement betweenthem if, and insofar as, the respective responsibilities of the controllers are notdetermined by law. The arrangement shall designate a contact point for datasubjects.
Processor and the supervision of processing
§48.(1) Where processing is carried out on behalf of a controller, thecontroller shall only use processors providing sufficient guarantees to implementappropriate technical and organisational measures in such a manner that processing will meet the requirements of this federal law and ensure the protection of the rightsofthe data subject.
(2)The processor shall not engage another processor without prior specificwritten authorisation of the controller.
(3) Processing by a processor shall be governed by a contract or other legal actunder Union law or on the groundsof an explicit legal authorisation that is bindingon the processor with regard to the controller and that sets out the subject matter andduration of the processing, the nature and purpose of the processing, the type ofpersonal data and categories of data subjects and the obligations and rights of thecontroller. This contract or other legal act shall stipulate, in particular, that theprocessor: 1.processes the personal data onlyon documented instructions from the
controller, including with regard to transfers of personal data to a thirdcountry or an international organisation, unless required to do so by Unionlaw or by laws to which the processor is subject; in such a case, theprocessor shall inform the controller of that legal requirement beforeprocessing, unless that law prohibits such information on importantgrounds of public interest; 2.ensures that persons authorised to process the personal data have committed themselves to confidentiality or are under an appropriate statutoryobligation of confidentiality; 3.takes all measures necessary pursuant to §54; 4.respects the conditions referred to in paras.2 and 4 for engaging another processor; 5.taking into account the nature of the processing, assists the controller by
appropriate technical and organisational measures, insofar as this ispossible, for the fulfilment of the controller’s obligation to respond torequests for exercising the data subject’s rights laid down in this Chapter; 6.assists the controller in ensuring compliance with the obligations pursuant to §52 to §56, takinginto account the nature of processing and theinformation available to the processor; 7.at the choice of the controller, deletes or returns all the personal data to the controller after the end of the provision of services relating to processing,and deletes existing copies unless Union law or laws require(s) storage ofthe personal data; 8.makes available to the controller all information necessary to demonstrate compliance with the obligations laid down in paras.1 to 6 and allows forand contributes to audits, including inspections, conducted by the controlleror another auditor mandated by the controller.
With regard to subpara.8, the processor shall immediately inform the controller if,in its opinion, an instruction infringes this Chapter or other data protectionprovisions of Union law or statutory data protection provisions.
(4) Where a processor engages another processor for carrying out specificprocessing activities on behalf of thecontroller, the same data protection obligationsas set out in the contract or other legal act between the controller and the processoras referred to in para.3 shall be imposed on that other processor by way of a contractor other legal act under Unionlaw or in accordance with laws, in particularproviding sufficient guarantees to implement appropriate technical andorganisational measures in such a manner that the processing will meet therequirements of this Chapter. Where that other processor fails to fulfil its dataprotection obligations, the initial processor shall remain fully liable to the controllerfor the performance of that other processor’s obligations.
(5)The contract or the other legal act referred to in paras.3 and 4 shall be inwriting, including in electronic form.
(6) The processor and any person acting under the authority of the controlleror of the processor, who has access to personal data, shall not process those dataexcept on instructions from the controller, unless required to do so by Unionlaw orin accordance with laws.
(7) If a processor determines, ininfringement of this Chapter, the purposes andmeans of processing, that processor shall be considered to be a controller in respectof that processing.
Records of processing activities
§49.(1) Each controller shall maintain a record of processing activities,applying Article30 paras.1 to 4 of the General Data Protection Regulationaccordingly; the references in Article30 para.1 (g) and para.2 (d) of the GeneralData Protection Regulation refer to §54, and the reference to the representative ofthe controller or the processor shall not apply.
(2) Therecord referred to in para.1 shall also contain information on 1.the use of profiling, if profiling is used, and 2.the legal basis for the processing operation, including transfers, for which the personal data are intended.
(3) Each processor shall maintain a record for all categories of processingactivities performed on behalf of a controller, containing the following:1.name and contact details ofthe processor or processors, each controller on whose behalf the processor is acting, as well as any data protection officer, 2.the categories of processing activities performed on behalf of each
controller, 3.where applicable, transfers of personal data to a third country or an international organisation, if ordered accordingly by the controller,including the identification of the third country or the internationalorganisation, 4.if possible, a general description of the technical and organisational measures pursuant to §54 para.1.
Logging
§50.(1) Every processing operation shall be logged in an appropriate mannerso that the legitimacy of processing can be traced and verified.
(2) In automated processing systems, all processing operations shall be loggedin an automated manner. These log data shall at least reveal the purpose, theprocessed data, the date and time of processing, the identification of the person whoprocessed the personal data, and the identity of any recipient of such personal data.
(3) In non-automated processing systems, at least consultations anddisclosures, including transmissions, changes and erasures, shall be logged. Para.2sentence2 shall apply to these log data.
(4) The logs shall exclusively be used to verify the lawfulness of the dataprocessing, including self-monitoring and ensuring the integrity and security of thepersonal data, and in criminal proceedings in court.
(5) The controller and the processor shall provide the logs to the DataProtection Authority at its request.
Cooperation withthe Data Protection Authority
§51.The controller and the processor shall cooperate, on request, with the DataProtection Authority in the performance of its tasks.
Data protection impact assessment
§52.To protect the rights and legitimate interests of data subjects affected bydata processing activities and other persons concerned, the controller shall carry outa data protection impact assessment pursuant to Article35 paras.1, 2, 3, 7 and 11of the General Data Protection Regulation, with demonstration pursuant toArticle35 para.7 (d) of the General Data Protection Regulation referring tocompliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
Priorconsultation of the Data Protection Authority
§53.In accordance with Article36 of the General Data Protection Regulation,the controller shall consult the Data Protection Authority prior to processing whichwill form part of a new filing system to be created; referencesin Article36 paras.1and 3 (e) of the General Data Protection Regulation refer to §52, and the referenceto the provisions regarding the powers of the Data Protection Authority in Article36para.2 of the General Data Protection Regulation refers to §33, and the measuresreferred to in Article36 para.2 of the General Data Protection Regulation shall be taken within six weeks, with the possibility to extend that period by an additional month.
Data security measures
§54.(1)The controller and the processor, taking into account the state of theart, the costs of implementation and the nature, scope,context and purposes of theprocessing as well as the risk of varying likelihood and severity for the rights andfreedoms of natural persons, shall implement appropriate technical andorganisational measures, taking into account the different categories pursuant to§37, to ensure a level of security appropriate to the risk, in particular as regards theprocessing of special categories of personal data referred to in §39.
(2) In respect of automated processing, the controller or processor, followingan evaluation of the risks, shall implement measures designed to: 1.deny unauthorised persons access to processing equipment used for processing (‘equipment access control’); 2.prevent the unauthorised reading, copying, modification or removal of data media (‘data media control’); 3.prevent the unauthorised input of personal data and the unauthorised inspection, modification or deletion of stored personal data (‘storagecontrol’); 4.prevent the use of automated processing systems byunauthorised persons using data communication equipment (‘user control’); 5.ensure that persons authorised to use an automated processing system have access only to the personal data covered by their access authorisation (‘dataaccess control’);6.ensure that it is possible to verify and establish the bodies to which personal data have been or may be transmitted or made available using datacommunication equipment (‘communication control’); 7.ensure that it is subsequently possible to verify and establish which personal data have been input into automated processing systems andwhen and bywhom the personal data were input (‘input control’); 8.prevent the unauthorised reading, copying, modification or deletion of personal data during transfers of personal data or during transportation ofdata media (‘transport control’); 9.ensure that installed systems may, in the case of interruption, be restored (‘recovery’); 10.ensure that the functions of the system perform, that the appearance of faults in the functionsis reported (‘reliability’) and that stored personal datacannot be corrupted by means of a malfunctioning of the system (‘integrity’).
Notification of a breach to the Data Protection Authority
§55.(1) In accordance with Article33 of the General Data ProtectionRegulation, the controller shall notify personal data breaches to the Data ProtectionAuthority.
(2) Where the personal data breach involves personal data that have beentransmitted by or to the controller of another Member State of the European Union,the information referred to in Article33 para.3 of the General Data ProtectionRegulation shall be communicated to the controller of that Member State of theEuropean Union without undue delay.
Communication of personal data breaches to data subjects
§56.(1) In accordance with Article34 of the General Data ProtectionRegulation, the controller shall communicate breaches concerning their personaldata to data subjects.
(2) Communication pursuant to para.1 can be delayed, restricted or omittedunder the conditions laid out in §43 para.4.
Designation, position and tasks of the data protection officer
§57.(1) Every controller shall designate a data protection officer in accordancewith Article37 paras.5 and 7 of the General Data Protection Regulation. Courts areexempted from the obligation to designate a data protection officer in the context oftheir judicial activities. §5 shall apply accordingly with regard to the provisions ofthis Chapter.
(2) Article38 of the General Data Protection Regulation shall apply to theposition of thedata protection officer.
(3) The data protection officer shall have the tasks referred to in Article39 ofthe General Data Protection Regulation with regard to compliance with theprovisions of this Chapter.
(4) The controller shall publish the contact details of the data protection officerand communicate them to the Data Protection Authority.
Part 4
Transfers of personal data tothird countries or international organisations 
General principles for transfers of personal data
§58.(1) Any transfer by competent authorities of personal data which areundergoing processing or are intended for processing after transfer to a third countryor to an international organisation shall take place only if the conditions laid downin this Chapter are complied with and 1.the transfer is necessary for the purposes set out in §36 para.1, 2.the personal data are transferred to a controller in a third countryor international organisation that is an authority competent for the purposesreferred to in §36 para.1, 3.where personal data are transmitted or made available from another EU
Member State, that Member State has given its prior authorisation to thetransfer, 4.the European Commission has adopted an adequacy decision pursuant to §59 paras.1 and 2 or, in the absence of such a decision, appropriatesafeguards as referred to in §59 paras.3 to 5 have been provided or exist,or, in the absence of an adequacy decision pursuant to §59 paras.1 and 2and of appropriate safeguards in accordance with §59 paras.3 to 5,derogations for specific situations apply pursuant to §59 paras.6 and 7;and 5.it is ensured that an onward transfer to another third country or international organisation is permitted only subject to prior authorisation by thecompetent authority that carried out the original transfer and after takinginto due account all relevant factors, including the seriousness of thecriminal offence, the purpose for which the personal data was originally transferred and the level of personal data protection in the third country oran international organisation to which personal data are onward transferred.
(2) Transfers without prior authorisation pursuant to para.1 subpara.3 shall bepermitted onlyif the transfer is necessary for the prevention of an immediate andserious threat to public security of a Member State or a third country or to essentialinterests of a Member State and the prior authorisation cannot be obtained in goodtime. The authority responsible for giving prior authorisation shall be informedwithout delay.
(3) If a competent authority of another EU Member State requests authorisationto transfer to a third country or an international organisation pursuant to para.1subpara.3 personal data that have originally been transferred from Austria, theauthority that originally transferred the personal data shall be the authoritycompetent for giving the authorisation, unless otherwise provided for by law.
Data transfers to third countries or international organisations
§59.(1)The transfer of personal data to a third country or an internationalorganisation shall be permitted where the European Commission has decidedpursuant to Article36 para.3 of Directive (EU) 2016/680 by way of animplementing act that the third country, a territory or one or more specified sectorswithin that third country, or the international organisation in question ensures anadequate level of protection. Such a transfer shall not require any specificauthorisation. The authorisation obligation pursuant to §58 para.1 subpara.3 shallremain unaffected thereby.
(2) A decision by the European Commission taken pursuant to Article36para.5 of Directive (EU) 2016/680 to revoke, amend or suspend a decision pursuantto Article36 para.3 of Directive (EU) 2016/680 shall be without prejudice totransfers of personal data to the third country, the territory or one or more specifiedsectors within that third country, or the international organisation in questionpursuant to paras.3 to 8.
(3) In the absence of a decision pursuant to para.1, a transfer of personal datato a third country or an international organisation may take place where 1.appropriate safeguardswith regard to the protection of personal data are provided for in a legally binding instrument; or 2.the controller, following an assessment of the circumstances relevant for the transfer of personal data, concludes that appropriate safeguards existwith regard to the protection ofpersonal data. 
(4) If appropriate safeguards pursuant to para.3 subpara.2 exist for categoriesof transfers, the controller shall inform the Data Protection Authority of thesecategories.
(5)Transferspursuant to para.3 subpara.2 shall be documented, and thedocumentation shall be made available to the Data Protection Authority on request,including the date and time of the transfer, information about the receivingcompetent authority, the justification for the transfer and the personal datatransferred.
(6) In the absence of an adequacy decision pursuant to paras.1 to 2 or ofappropriate safeguards pursuant to paras.3 to 5, a transfer ofpersonal data to a thirdcountry or an international organisation may take place in accordance with para.5only on the condition that the transfer is necessary: 1.to protect the vital interests ofa person, 2.to safeguard legitimate interests of the data subject, where the law so provides, 3.for the prevention of an immediate and serious threat to the public security of an EU Member State or a third country, 4.in individual cases for the purposes set out in §36 para.1, or 5.in an individual casefor the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims relating to the purposes set out in §36 para.1.
(7) In the cases referred to in para.6 subparas.4 and 5, a transfer is permittedonly if no fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject overriding the publicinterests in the transfer are an obstacle to the transfer.
Chapter 4
Special penal provisions
Administrative penalties
§62.(1) Unless the offence meets the elements of Article83 ofthe GeneralData Protection Regulation or is subject to a more severe punishment according toother administrative penal provisions, an administrative offence punishable by a fineof up to €50,000 is committed by anyone who 1.intentionally and illegally gains access to data processing or maintains an obviously illegal meansof access,2.transmits data intentionally in violation of the rules on confidentiality (§6), in particular intentionally uses data entrusted to him or her according to§7or §8 for other prohibited purposes, 3.by giving incorrect information intentionally obtains personal data according to §10, 4.processes images contrary to the provisions of Chapter 1, Part 3, or 5.refuses inspection pursuant to §22 para.2.
(2) Attempts shall be punishable.
(3) In the case of an administrative offence pursuant to paras.1 and 2,administrative fines can be imposed on legal persons in accordance with §30.
(4) Data media and programs as well asapparatus for the transmission andrecording of images can be forfeited (§10, §17 and §18 of the Administrative PenalAct) if they are linked to an administrative offence according to para.1.
(5) The Data Protection Authority shall be the competent authority fordecisions pursuant to paras.1 to 4.
Processing with the intention to make a profit or to cause harm
§63.Whoever, with the intention to enrich himselfor a third person unlawfullyor to harm someone regarding that person’s entitlement guaranteed according to §1para.1, deliberately uses personal data that have been entrusted to or have becomeaccessible to him solely because of his professional occupation, or that he has acquired illegally, for himself or makes such data available to another person orpublishes such data despite the data subject’s interest in confidentiality whichdeserves protection, shall be punished by a court with imprisonment of up to oneyear or with a fine of up to €720, unless the offence is subject to a more severepunishment pursuant to another provision.
Chapter 5
Final provisions
Executionand implementation of EU legal acts §64.(1) This federal law serves to implement Regulation (EU) 2016/679 onthe protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data andon the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive95/46/EC (General DataProtection Regulation), OJ NoL119 of 4May2016, p.1.
(2) Furthermore, this federal law serves to implement Directive (EU) 2016/680on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal databy competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detectionor prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and onthe free movement of such data, and repealing Council Framework Decision2008/977/JHA, OJ NoL119 of 4May2016, p.89.
Gender-neutral use of language
§65.Insofar as expressions relating to natural persons in this federal law aregiven only in the male form, they shall apply to males and females equally. Whenthe expressions are applied to specific natural persons, the form specific to thegender shall be used.
Enactment of regulations
§66.Regulations based on this federal law as amended may already be enactedas of the day following the promulgation of the legal provision to be implemented;they shall, however, not enter into force before the statutory provisions which are tobe implemented.
References
§67.Insofar as provisions of this federal law refer to provisions of other federallaws, these shall be applied as amended from time to time.
Execution
§68.The Federal Minister of Constitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulationand Justiceand the other federal ministers, within their sphere of responsibilities,shall execute this federal law insofar as the execution has not been entrusted to theFederal Government.
Transitional provisions
§69.(1) The current term of office of the head of the Data Protection Authorityat the time of the entry into force of this federal law shall continue until the end ofthe term of office. This shall also apply to the deputy.
(2) The Data Protection Authority shall continue to have the Data ProcessingRegister kept by the Data Protection Authority for archiving purposes until31December2019. No entries and changes to the contents of the Data ProcessingRegister may be made. Registrations in the Data Processing Register shall becomevoid. Any person may inspect the Register. Inspection of the registration fileincluding any authorisations contained therein shall be granted if the personapplying for inspection can satisfactorily demonstrate that he or she is a data subject,and as far as no overriding interests in confidentiality which deserve protection onthe part of the controller or another person are an obstacle to access.
(3) Any registration procedures pursuant to §17 and §18 para.2 of theDataProtection Act2000pending at the time of entryinto force of this federal law shallbe deemed discontinued. Any registration procedures pursuant to §13, §46 and§47 of theData Protection Act2000 pending at the time of entry into force of thisfederal law shall be continued if authorisation is required pursuant to this federallaw or the General Data Protection Regulation. If no authorisation is required, theyshall be deemed discontinued.
(4) Proceedings regarding theDataProtection Act2000pending before theData Protection Authority or before courts of law at the time of entry into force ofthis federal law shall be continued in accordance with the provisions of this federallaw and the General Data Protection Regulationwith the reservation that courts oflaw continue to have jurisdiction.
(5) Infringements of theData Protection Act2000that are not yet pending atthe time of entry into force of this federal law shall be judged in accordance withthe legal situation after entry into force of this federal law. A punishable offencecommitted before this federal law enters into force shall be judged in accordancewith the legal situation that is more favourable for the offender with regard to itsoverall effects; this shall also apply to appellate proceedings.
(6) Submissions by a data subject pursuant to §24 shall be exempt from federaladministrative fees.
(7) The entities or bodies delegating the members and substitute members shallnotify the Federal Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, Reforms, Deregulation andJusticein writing within a period of two weeks from25May2018 of the membersand substitute members of the Data Protection Council, the number of whom mustcorrespond to §15 para.1 subparas.1 to 6. The constitutive meeting of the DataProtection Council shall take place within six weeks after 25May2018. Theprevious head and the two previous deputy heads shall continue to exercise theirfunctions until the election of the new head and the two deputy heads.
(8) Special provisions on the processing of personal data in other federal orprovincial laws shall remain unaffected.
(9) Authorisations pursuant to §13, §46 and §47 of theData ProtectionAct2000granted by the Data Protection Authority in a final manner shall remainunaffected. Consent given pursuant to theData Protection Act2000shall continueto be valid if it meets the requirements of the General Data Protection Regulation.
Entry into force
§70.(1) The other provisions of this federal law shall also enter into force on1January 2000. (2) §26 para.6 and §52 paras.1 and 2 as amended by the federal lawpromulgated in Federal Law GazetteI No136/2001 shall enter into force on1January 2002. (3) §48apara.5 as amended by the federal law promulgated in Federal LawGazetteI No135/2009 shall enter into force on 1January2010. (4) The table of contents, §4 para.1 subparas.4, 5, 7 to 9, 11 and 12, §8paras.1, 2 and 4, §12 para.1, the re-numbering ofthe paragraphs in §13, §16paras.1 and 3, §17 paras.1, 1a and 4, §19 para.1 subpara.3a and para.2, the re-numbering of the paragraphs in §19, §20 to §22a including captions, §24 para.2a,§24 para.4, §26 paras.1 to 8 and 10, §28 para.3,§30 para.2a, 5 to 6a, §31 and §31a including captions, §32 paras.1, 4, 6 and 7, §34 paras.1, 3 and 4, §36paras.3, 3a and 9, §39 para.5, §40 paras.1 and 2, §41 para.2 subpara.4a, §42para.1 subpara.1, §42 para.5, §46 para.1 subparas.2 and 3, paras.2 to 3a, §47para.4, §49 para.3, §50 paras.1 to 2a, Part9a, §51, §52 paras.2 and 4, §55, §61paras.6 to 9 as well as §64 as amended by the federal law promulgated in FederalLaw GazetteI No133/2009 shall enter into force on 1January 2010.Simultaneously, §4 para.1 subpara.10, §13 para.3 as well as §51 para.2 shallbecome ineffective. (5) §36para.6 as amended bythe federal law promulgated in Federal LawGazetteI No133/2009 shall enter into force on 1July2010.  (6) §37 para.2,§38 para.2 and §61 para.9 as amended by the federal lawpromulgated in Federal Law GazetteI No57/2013 shall enter into force on1May2013. (7) The table of contents, §5 para.4, §10 para.2, §12 para.4, §13 paras.1and 2 subpara.2, paras.3, 4 and 6, §16 para.1, §17 para.1, §18 para.2, §19para.1 subpara.6 and para.2, §20 paras.2 and 5subpara.2, §21 para.1subpara.3, §22 paras.2 to 4, §22a paras.1, 3 to 5, §23 para.2, §26 paras.2, 5 and7, §27 paras.5 and 7, the caption of §30, §30 paras.1, 2, 2a, 4 to 6a, the captionof §31, §31 paras.1, 2, 5, 6 and 8, §31a, §32paras.5 to 7, §34 para.3 and 4, thecaption of §35, §35 para.1, §36 to §40 including the captions, §41 para.2subpara.1, §44 paras.6 and 8, §46 para.2 subpara.3 and para.3, §47 paras.3 and4, §48a para.2, §50 paras.1 and 2, §50b para.2, §50c para.1, §52 para.2subparas.2 and 3 as well as para.5, §54 para.2 and §61 paras.8 to 10 as amendedby the federal law promulgated in Federal Law GazetteI No83/2013 shall enter intoforce on 1January 2014. Simultaneously, §41 para.2 subpara.4a and the DataProtection Commission Remuneration Regulation, Federal Law GazetteIINo145/2006, shall become ineffective. All organisational and human resourcemeasures needed to appoint the head of the Data Protection Authority and the deputymay be implemented before the federal law promulgated in Federal Law GazetteINo83/2013 enters into force. (8)(Constitutional provision)§2 para.2 and §35 para.2 as amended by thefederal law promulgated in Federal Law Gazette I No 83/2013 shall enter into forceon 1January2014. (9) The title, the table of contents, Chapter1, the name and caption ofChapter2, Parts1, 2, 3, and 4, the caption and name of Part5, §35 para.1, the nameand caption of Chapter3, Parts1, 2, and 3, the caption and name of Part4, §58 and §59, including the captions, as well as Chapters4 and 5 as amendedby the federallaw promulgated in Federal Law GazetteI No120/2017 shall enter into force on25May2018. In Article2, Parts1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, the name and caption of Part7,the caption of §35, §36 to §44 including the captions, Parts8, 9, 9a and 10, thename and the caption of Part11, §53 to §59 including the captions, §61 paras.1to 3 and 5 to 10 as well as §62 to §64 including the captions in the version beforethe amendment by Federal Law GazetteI No120/2017 shall become ineffectiveasof the end of 24May2018. (10) The Standards and Models Regulation2004, Federal Law GazetteIINo312/2004, the Data Processing Register Regulation2012, Federal LawGazetteII No257/2012, and the Data Protection Adequacy Regulation, FederalLaw GazetteII No521/1999, shall become ineffective as of the end of24May2018. (11)(Constitutional provision)§35 para.2 as amended by the federal lawpromulgated in Federal Law Gazette I No23/2018 shall enter into force on25May2018. (12) The table of contents, §4 paras.1, 5 to 7, §5 para.3 sentence 1 andpara.5, §9 including the caption, §11 including the caption, §12 para.3 subpara.2and para.4 subpara.3, §14 para.1, §15 para.1 subpara.5, para.3, para.5subparas.1 and 2, paras.6, 7 and 8, §16 para.3subpara.2 and para.5, §19 paras.2and 3, §23 para.1, §26 para.1, §28, §30 paras.3 and 5, §32 para.1 subpara.1,§36 para.1 and para.2 subpara.7, §44 para.2, §49 paras.1 and 3, §56 para.1,§64 para.2, §68 as well as §69 para.5 and 7 as amended by the federal lawpromulgated in Federal Law Gazette I No24/2018 shall enter into force on25May2018. Simultaneously, §45 para.7 in the version before the amendment byFederal Law GazetteI No24/2018 shall become ineffective. §70 paras.1 to 8 asamended by the federal law promulgated in Federal Law Gazette I No24/2018 shallenter into force on the day following promulgation. To the extent that theinstructions given in the federal law promulgated in Federal Law GazetteINo24/2018refer to provisions created by the Data Protection AmendmentAct2018, Federal Law GazetteI No120/2017, the provisions of the federal lawpromulgated in Federal Law GazetteI No24/2018 shall prevail over the provisionsof the Data Protection AmendmentAct2018, Federal Law GazetteI No120/2017. (13) §16 para.5 and §70 paras.6, 7, 9, 10 and 12 as amended by the federallaw promulgated in Federal Law GazetteI No14/2019 shall enter into force as ofthe end of the day of promulgation of this federal law; simultaneously, the entries made with regard to §60 and §61 in the table of contents shall become ineffective.The entries regarding §2 and §3 in the table of contents and §4 para.7 shallbecome ineffective on 1January2020. (14)(Constitutional provision)§2 and §3 including the captions shallbecome ineffectiveas of the end of 31December2019. §70 paras.8 and 11 asamended by the federal law promulgated in Federal Law GazetteI No14/2019 shallenter into force as of the end of the day of promulgation of this federal law;simultaneously, §61 including the caption shall become ineffective.






































