GOVERNMENT GAZETTE OF THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC
Hellenic Data Protection Authority (HDPA), measuresfor implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of theEuropean Parliament and of the Council of 27 April2016 on the protection of natural persons with regardto the processing of personal data, and transpositionof Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliamentand of the Council of 27 April 2016, and otherprovisions.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC
Hereby adopts the following Law which has been passedby the Parliament:
CHAPTER A
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Purpose
The purpose of this Law is: a) to replace the legislative framework governing the establishment and operation of the Data ProtectionAuthority, b) to adopt measures for implementing Regulation (EU)2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Councilof 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons withregard to the processing of personal data and on the freemovement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation, hereinafter: GDPR), c) to transpose Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the EuropeanParliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on theprotection of individuals with regard to the processing ofpersonal data by competent authorities for the purposesof the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal oﬀences, or the execution of criminal penalties, and the free movement of such data, and repealing CouncilFramework Decision 2008/977/JHA.
Article 2
Material scope
The provisions of this Law shall apply to the processingof personal data wholly or partly by automated means andto the processing other than by automated means of such data, which form part of a ﬁling system or are intended toform part of a ﬁling system carried out by: (a) public bodies or (b) private bodies, unless the processing is carried out by a natural person in the course of a purely personal orhousehold activity.
Article 3
Territorial scope
The provisions of this Law shall apply to public bodies.They shall also apply to private bodies, provided that: (a) the controller or processor processes personal datain the Greek territory, (b) personal data are processed in the context of the activities of an establishment of the controller or processorwithin the Greek territory, or if (c) although the controller or processor has noestablishment in a Member State of the European Union oranother contracting state of the European Economic Area,it falls within the scope of the GDPR.
Article 4
Deﬁnitions
For the purposes of this Law: (a) ‘public body’ means public authorities, independent and regulatory administrative authorities, legal persons governed by public law, ﬁrst and second-level local government authorities with their legal persons and their legal entities, state-owned or public undertakings and agencies, legal persons governed by private law which are state-owned or regularly receive at least 50% of their annual budget in the form of state subsidies, or theiradministration is designated by the state, (b) ‘private body’ means any natural or legal person orgroup of persons without legal personality which does not fall within the deﬁnition of a ‘public body’,(c) ‘competent supervisory authority’ means the HellenicData Protection Authority (hereinafter: the Authority).
Article 5
Legal basis for the processing of personal data by public bodies
Public bodies may process personal data whereprocessing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of oﬃcial authority conferred on the controller.
Article 6
Designation of the data protection oﬃcer in public bodies 1. Public bodies shall designate a data protection oﬃcer (hereinafter: the DPO). 2. A single DPO may be appointed for several publicbodies, taking into account their organisational structureand size. 3. The DPO shall be selected on the basis of professional qualities and, in particular, expert knowledge of dataprotection law and practices, and the ability to fulﬁl the tasks referred to in Article 8. 4. The DPO may be an employee of the public body in any capacity, or fulﬁl his or her tasks on the basis of a service contract. 5. The public body shall publish the contact details of theDPO and communicate them to the Authority, unless thisis not permitted for reasons of national security or for the purposes of maintaining conﬁdentiality, as provided for by
law.
Article 7
Position of the DPO in public bodies 1. The public body shall ensure that the DPO is involved,properly and in a timely manner, in all issues relating to theprotection of personal data. 2. The public body shall support the DPO in performingthe tasks referred to in Article 8 by providing resourcesnecessary to carry out those tasks, ensuring access topersonal data, to processing operations, and to maintain his or her expert knowledge. 3. The public body shall ensure that the DPO does not receive any instructions regarding the exercise of his or her tasks, reports directly to the highest management level ofthe public body, and is not dismissed or penalised by thecontroller for performing his or her tasks. 4. Termination of the employment contract of the DPO,or revocation of the duties assigned to him or her, wherethe DPO is also an employee of the public body, shall only be allowed for good reason. After the expiry of his or her employment contract as a DPO, he or she shall not bedismissed for one (1) year, unless the public body has goodreason to terminate his or her contract. 5. The data subjects may consult the DPO on any matter relating to the processing of personal data and the exercise of their rights under the GDPR, this Law and any otherlegislation on the protection of personal data. The DPO shall be bound by secrecy or conﬁdentiality concerning the identity of data subjects and the circumstances in whichconclusions can be drawn as to the data subject, unless theidentity of the data subject is disclosed by the subject itself. 6. If the DPO, in performing his or her tasks, becomesaware of personal data for which the head of the publicbody has the right to refuse to give evidence as a witnessfor professional reasons, that right shall also apply to theDPO and his or her assistants.
Article 8
Tasks of the DPO in public bodies
1. In addition to his or her tasks under the GDPR, theDPO shall have at least the following tasks: (a) to inform and advise the public body and theemployees, who carry out the processing, of theirobligations under the provisions of this Law and any otherlegislation on the protection of personal data; (b) to monitor compliance with the provisions of this Lawand any other legislation on the protection of personal data,and with the personal data protection policies of the publicbody, including accountability and the related audits; (c) to provide advice as regards the data protection impact assessment and monitor its implementationpursuant to Article 65; (d) to cooperate with the Authority; (e) to act as the contact point with the Authority on issues relating to processing, including the prior consultationreferred to in Article 67, and to consult the Authority, whereappropriate, with regard to any other matter. 2. The tasks of the DPO, who may be designated by judicial and prosecutorial authorities, shall not concernthe processing operations carried out by judicial andprosecutorial authorities acting in their judicial capacity. 3. The DPO may fulﬁl other tasks and duties. Thecontroller or processor shall ensure that the exercise ofany such tasks and duties does not result in a conﬂict of interests. 4. The DPO shall, in the performance of his or her tasks,have due regard to the risk associated with processing, the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing.
CHAPTER B
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITY
Article 9
Hellenic Data Protection Authority
The Authority, which has been established by Law2472/1997 (Government Gazette A’ 50), shall supervisethe application of the provisions of the GDPR, this Lawand other regulations relating to the protection of naturalpersons with regard to the processing of their personaldata on the Greek territory. The Authority is an independentpublic authority under Article 9a of the Constitution and hasits seat in Athens.
Article 10
Competence
1. The Authority shall cooperate with the supervisoryauthorities of Member States of the European Union, andthe European Commission. 2. The Authority shall represent Greece in the EuropeanData Protection Board (hereinafter: the EDPB) and othercommittees or bodies relating to the protection of personaldata which involve the participation of a national supervisoryauthority. 3. The Authority shall cooperate with respectivesupervisory authorities of third countries and international organisations to meet the objectives speciﬁed in Article 50 of the GDPR. 4. In cases where an independent audit or supervisionis provided for in international or transnational conventionsor in European Law or in national law, the Authority shall exercise its respective competences and powers. 5. The Authority shall not be competent to superviseprocessing operations of personal data carried out byjudicial and prosecutorial authorities acting in their judicial capacity, or processing operations of classiﬁed personal data carried out for activities concerning national security.
Article 11
Functional independence
1. The Authority shall be composed of the President and six (6) members, who shall be appointed with theirrespective alternates. They shall have a six-year non-renewable term of oﬃce. 2. Individuals of acknowledged status shall be selectedas members and alternates, who are distinguished for their scientiﬁc expertise and professional experience in areas related to the mission and competence of the Authority.Greek nationality is a precondition for selection as amember of the Authority. 3. The President, the members of the Authority and theiralternates shall be selected and appointed in accordancewith Article 101a of the Constitution. 4. The members of the Authority shall be senior state oﬃcials, enjoy both personal and functional independence and shall not be subject to any hierarchical or administrative control. They shall exercise their duties and powers freefrom external inﬂuence, whether direct or indirect, and shall neither seek nor take instructions from anybody.
5. The President and the Deputy President shall be employed on an exclusive time basis at the Authority. Such status shall entail the suspension of any public function andprofessional activity.
6. The members of the Authority shall not incur third party civil liability for acts or omissions in the exercise of their powers. They shall be liable to the Greek state for acts oromissions committed intentionally or with gross negligence.The members of the Authority shall not be prosecuted for opinions expressed or for acts or omissions committed in the course of carrying out their duties, unless they actedfraudulently or with gross negligence. The Authority mayreimburse the costs of legal defence of its members in theevent of an action or criminal proceedings brought against them in respect of acts or omissions resulting solely fromthe performance of their duties.
Article 12
Impediments — incompatibilities for the members
of the Authority
1. A person may not be appointed as a President, DeputyPresident, or member of the Authority if this person is: (a)a minister, state secretary, general or special secretary of aMinistry or of a separate general or special secretariat anda member of parliament; and (b) a manager or a memberof a management body of an undertaking that providesservices relating to the processing of personal data or isassociated with a project contract of equivalent content. 2. Any kind of professional or other activities relating tothe competences of the Authority shall be incompatible with the status of member of the Authority, with the exceptionof scientiﬁc and research activities. The members of the Authority may not appear before the Authority for two (2) years after the expiry of their term of oﬃce. 3. The members of the Authority shall be permittedto perform duties of HEI (higher education institutions) teaching staﬀ on a full-time or part-time basis. 4. Any person who, following his or her appointment: (a) Acquires one of the functions constituting a barrier to appointment referred to paragraph 1. (b) Engages in actions or undertakes any work or project,or acquires another capacity which, in the Authority’s view,is incompatible with his or her duties as a member of the Authority, shall be automatically disqualiﬁed as President, Deputy President or member of the Authority. 5. The Authority shall establish the incompatibilitiesreferred to in the previous paragraph, without theparticipation of the member who may be in one of thesituations of incompatibility. The Authority shall reachits decision after hearing the member concerned. Theproceedings shall be initiated either by the President of theAuthority or by the President of the Parliament.
Article 13
Tasks of the Authority
1. In addition to the Authority’s tasks under Article 57 ofthe GDPR, the Authority shall: (a) be competent for the monitoring and enforcement ofthis Law and other regulations relating to the protection ofindividuals with regard to the processing of personal data, (b) take appropriate action to promote public awarenessand understanding of the risks, safeguards and rights inrelation to the processing of personal data, (c) provide an opinion on any provision to be included ina law or regulatory act relating to the processing of personaldata. The consultation shall take place at the drafting stage ofthe regulation at a time and in a manner that allows for atimely opinion by the Authority and the relevant consultationon the content of the draft regulation, (d) issue guidelines and make recommendations on anymatter concerning the processing of personal data, withoutprejudice to the tasks of the EDPB in accordance with Article 70 of the GDPR, (e) upon submission of a speciﬁc request, inform the datasubject of the exercise of his or her rights in accordance with this Law and other regulations for the protection ofindividuals with regard to the processing of personal data.For that purpose, it shall cooperate with the supervisoryauthorities of other Member States of the European Union, (f) issue standard documents and complaint forms, (g) handle complaints lodged by the data subject, or by a body, organisation or association, and informthe complainant of the progress and the outcome of theinvestigation or inspection within a reasonable period,
(h) conduct, ex oﬃcio or following a complaint, investigations or inspections regarding the application ofthis Law and other regulations relating to the protection ofindividuals with regard to the processing of personal data,including on the basis of information received from anotherpublic authority, (i) monitor relevant developments, insofar as theyhave an impact on the protection of personal data, inparticular developments in information and communicationtechnologies and commercial practices, (j) contribute to the activities of the EDPB.
2. In exercising its powers, the Authority shall ﬁle without further action any requests, questions or complaints whichare manifestly vague, unfounded or understated, or aresubmitted abusively or anonymously. The Authority shallinform the data subjects and the applicants of its actions.Without prejudice to the time limits set out in the GDPR, the priority for examining requests, questions and complaints shall be assessed by the Authority on the basis of therelevance and general interest of the matter.
Article 14
Activity report
The Authority shall draw up each year a report on theperformance of its tasks during the previous calendaryear. The report shall be submitted by the President of theAuthority to the President of the Parliament and the PrimeMinister, and shall be published in the Government Gazetteunder the responsibility of the Authority, which may givefurther publicity to the report.
Article 15
Investigative and corrective powers
1. In addition to the powers laid down in Article 58 of the GDPR, the Authority shall conduct, ex oﬃcio or following a complaint, investigations and audits relating to thecompliance with this Law during which the technological infrastructure and other automated or non-automated means supporting the processing of personal data aresubject to controls. In carrying out such investigations andinspections, the Authority shall have the power to obtain,from the controller and the processor, access to all personaldata processed and to all information necessary for thepurposes of such audits and the performance of its tasks, and no type of conﬁdentiality may be relied upon against it.The Authority shall, by way of exception, not have accessto data identifying associates or staﬀ employed in entities contained in records held for national security purposes orfor the purpose of investigating particularly serious crimes.
2. The audits shall be carried out by a member ormembers of the Authority, or employees of the Secretariat's department of scientiﬁc staﬀ who are specially authorisedto that eﬀect by the President of the Authority. The President and the members of the Authority, as well as the Secretariat’s specially mandated oﬃcials shall be deemedas special investigating oﬃcers having all the rights
provided for in the Code of Criminal Procedure. They shallbe entitled to carry out a preliminary investigation, evenwithout an order by the Public Prosecutor, in case of an act caught in ﬂagrante delicto, or a misdemeanor, or if there is a risk as a result of any delay. The public authorities shallassist the Authority in carrying out the audit.
3. The President of the Authority may grant the power to carry out audits to members and staﬀ of a supervisory authority of another Member State of the European Union (‘seconding supervisory authority’) in the framework of jointoperations carried out under Article 62 of the GDPR andArticle 79 of this Law.
4. The Authority shall, for the purposes of this Law: (a) issue warnings to a controller or processor that intended processing operations are likely to infringeprovisions of this Law; (b) order the controller or processor to comply with the provisions of this Law in a speciﬁed manner and within aspeciﬁed period, in particular by ordering the rectiﬁcation or erasure of personal data;
(c) order and impose a temporary or deﬁnitive limitation, or even a ban on the processing of personal data; (d) order and impose that documents, ﬁling systems,
equipment or means for processing personal data bedelivered to it, as well as their content in the case providedfor in subparagraph (c) of this paragraph; (e) seize documents, information, ﬁling systems for each piece of equipment and means of personal data breach,and their content which becomes known to the Authority in the exercise of its supervisory powers. The Authority
shall be the sequestrator of the above material until adecision has been reached by the competent judicial andprosecutorial authorities.
5. In addition to the corrective powers provided for inArticle 58(2) of the GDPR, the Authority shall order thecontroller or processor, or a recipient, or a third party, todiscontinue the processing of personal data or to return or lock (block) the relevant data or to destroy the ﬁling system or the relevant data. 6. The Authority shall impose the administrative penaltiesprovided for in Article 83 of the GDPR and Article 39 hereof. 7. The Authority shall impose the administrative penaltiesprovided for in Article 82.
8. Where the protection of the individual against theprocessing of personal data concerning him or her requires immediate decision-making, the President may, at therequest of the person concerned or ex oﬃcio, issue a temporary order for immediate temporary limitation, inwhole or in part, of the processing or the operation of the ﬁle. The order shall apply until the Authority reaches its ﬁnal decision.
9. In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of the GDPR, this Law and other regulations relating to theprotection of the data subject with regard to the processingof personal data, the Authority, without prejudice to ChapterVII of the GDPR, shall adopt administrative regulatory acts to regulate speciﬁc, technical and detailed matters referred to in those acts.
10. The regulatory acts of the Authority, which shall notbe published in the Government Gazette, shall be publishedon the Authority’s website.
Article 16
Rights and obligations of the members of the
Authority
1. In performing their tasks, the President and themembers of the Authority shall be subject to their conscience and the law, and have a duty of conﬁdentiality.As witnesses or expert witnesses they may testify only onfacts exclusively and solely pertaining to the compliance with the provisions of the GDPR and this Law. The duty of conﬁdentiality shall be upheld even after the President and
the members of the Authority have in any way retired.
2. For a period of two (2) years after the expiry oftheir term of oﬃce, the President and the members of the Authority shall not be partners, shareholders, boardmembers, technical or other consultants, or be employedwith or without remuneration on a salaried assignmentbasis or in any legal relationship, in a company or anundertaking whose activities have been subject, directly orindirectly, to the control of the Authority during their term of oﬃce, provided that they have been in any way involved in such control. The same prohibition applies in the case ofcomplaints submitted to the Authority.
3. Article 18(3) of Law 2472/1997 shall apply to thedisciplinary liability of the President and the members of theAuthority.
4. The President or a member of the Authority who,in breach of this Law, discloses, in any way whatsoever,personal data accessible to him or her in the course of hisor her duties, or allows such data to become known to athird party, shall be punished by imprisonment for a period of up to two (2) years, and a ﬁne. If, however, he or she has committed the act with the purpose of gaining unlawful
beneﬁt on his or her behalf, or on behalf of another person, or for the purpose of causing harm to another person, thenhe or she shall be punished by imprisonment for a period of at least two (2) years, and a ﬁne.
Article 17
Operation of the Authority
1. The Authority may also act as a single-member body (President) or sit in chambers composed of at least three (3) members or alternates, and chaired by the Presidentof the Authority or his/her alternate. Employees of theAuditors Department shall be allowed to attend sessionsand meetings of the plenary and the chambers for casesto which they have been appointed assistant rapporteurs.
2. The Authority shall adopt its rules of procedure layingdown, in particular, the terms of operation in plenary andchambers, the allocation of duties between the plenary and the chambers, the responsibilities of the single-member body, and the assignment of such responsibilities by thePresident to the Deputy Chair and to members, both fulland alternate, the procedure for convening and conducting a meeting and a decision-making process, the prior hearing of the persons concerned, the procedure for processing andhandling cases, the methods in place to carry out audits,and matters relating to the disciplinary procedure. The rulesof procedure shall be published in the Government Gazette.The current rules of procedure (Decision 209/6.3.2000 (Government Gazette B’ 336) of the President of theAuthority, as amended and in force) shall apply until theAuthority adopts new rules of procedure.
3. A code of conduct for the members and staﬀ of the Authority shall be adopted by a decision of the Plenary.
4. The Authority may conclude memoranda ofunderstanding with higher education institutions, otherpublic bodies and local authorities with the purpose of ensuring a mutual exchange of information and mutual assistance on matters within its competence. Mutualassistance shall include, in particular, the provision ofinformation and the conduct of investigations and studies,assistance in investigations and audits, and the conductof inspections on the basis of questions compiled by theAuthority.
5. The Authority may oﬀer paid traineeships to studentsand graduates of higher education institutions whose ﬁeld of study is relevant to the Authority’s duties. The terms andconditions for the selection of trainees, the performanceof traineeships, as well as the conditions and the amountof the grant awarded, which is covered by the Authority’sbudget, shall be set out by a decision of the Authority.
Article 18
Secretariat of the Authority
1. The staﬀ of the Authority shall be appointed under a public or private law employment relationship of unlimitedduration to positions set out in the Organisational Chart ofthe Authority and selected in accordance with Article 4(1) ofLaw 3051/2002 (Government Gazette A’ 220). 2. Staﬀ members of the Auditors Department may notappear before the Authority for two (2) years after the expiry of their employment relationship with the Authority. 3. The Organisational Chart of the Authority settingout the level of operation of the Secretariat, the structureof the organisational units in directorates, departments and oﬃces, the qualiﬁcations of the staﬀ, the number of positions, the allocation of such positions in branches andspecialties, the setting up of new positions and any otherrelevant matter shall be stipulated by a presidential decreeissued following a proposal of the Minister of Justice and the Minister for Internal Aﬀairs, following an opinion of the Authority. The Organisational Chart also provides for therequirements, the bodies and the procedure for selectingthe head of the Secretariat, as well as the heads of theAuthority’s organisational units. The Organisational Chartalso provides for derogations from the applicable provisionsin order for the relevant arrangements to comply with theGDPR. Any amendment to the above presidential decreeshall require the prior opinion of the Authority. Until the presidential decree referred to in the previous subparagraphis issued, presidential decree 207/1998 on the organisationof the Secretariat of the Data Protection Authority and theestablishment of permanent posts (Government Gazette A’164) shall apply.
4. Without prejudice to the speciﬁc regulations of this Law, the Organisational Chart of the Authority and its Rules of Procedure, the Staﬀ Regulations of the Authority shall be governed by the provisions of Article 4(2) to (7) of Law3051/2002, as applicable, irrespective of their category, branch and formal qualiﬁcations.
5. Article 11(6) shall apply accordingly to the staﬀ of the Authority.
6. In order to meet urgent needs of the Authority’s Secretariat, permanent staﬀ or staﬀ employed on privatelaw employment contracts of indeﬁnite duration may beseconded from Central Administration bodies, as deﬁned in indent (f) of Article 14(1) of Law 4270/2014 (GovernmentGazette A’ 143), by derogation from the applicableprovisions. The duration of secondments shall be one (1)year renewable once. The secondment shall be carriedout following a joint decision of the competent Minister andthe President of the Authority without the opinion of therespective Boards of Employees. Prior agreement of the competent appointing bodies shall be speciﬁcally sought forthe secondment of ﬁrst and second-level local governmentauthority staﬀ.
7. Secretariat staﬀ may be seconded to supervisory authorities of the Member States, or to the Greek PermanentRepresentation, or to authorities of third countries or international organisations for a period of up to six (6) months following a decision of the Authority applying the provisions applicable to staﬀ seconded to EU institutions.In addition, staﬀ from the Authority‘s counterparts may alsobe seconded to the Authority for a period of up to six (6) months.
8. The university graduate Communications Departmentpositions at the Data Protection Authority shall be converted into equivalent scientiﬁc staﬀ positions recruited under aprivate law employment contract of indeﬁnite duration.Already serving staﬀ who holds the qualiﬁcations required under Presidential Decree No 50/2001 (Government Gazette A’ 39) "Determining the qualiﬁcations for
appointment in public service positions" and the legislation in force for the position of scientiﬁc staﬀ under a private law employment contract, shall state whether they agree to beassigned to that position or not within one month of the entry into force of this Law. Staﬀ willing to serve under a private law contract, who occupy one of the positions converted,shall maintain their insurance status and count the durationof previous relevant employment towards their grading and salary classiﬁcation in accordance with the provisions of Article 11(4) of Law 4354/2015 (Government Gazette A’176). In case of refusal or failure to submit a statement, the members of staﬀ shall continue to serve as permanentuniversity graduate Communications Oﬃcers in personalnon-transferable positions. In the period during whichthe members of staﬀ serve in personal non-transferable positions pursuant to the previous subparagraph, no equivalent positions of scientiﬁc staﬀ shall be ﬁlled under aprivate law employment contract of indeﬁnite duration.
Article19
Budget and Financial management
1. The Authority shall establish its own budget underthe responsibility of its President and shall enjoy fullindependence in implementing it. The involvement ofanother body shall not be required in this regard. The President of the Authority shall be the authorising oﬃcer.
2. The budget shall be established annually and submitted directly to the State General Accounting Oﬃce in accordance with the procedure set out in the PublicAccounting.
3. The Authority, in enjoying full independence, shallbe solely responsible for implementing its budget. Thetransfer of appropriations from one account to another and between diﬀerent major budget categories shall be allowed, depending on the needs of the Authority, by a decision ofthe Minister of Finance, provided that the total amount of the budget initially approved by the Parliament is not modiﬁed.Expenditure incurred by the Authority shall be carried outby the authorising oﬃcers and the public accounting in accordance with the relevant applicable provisions of thecommitment. The transfer of appropriations shall be carried out following a decision of the Authority and shall be notiﬁedto the State General Accounting Oﬃce.
4. The budget of the Authority may be amendedfollowing a decision of the Minister for Finance, uponrecommendation of the Authority, which is submitted to the State General Accounting Oﬃce.
5. The Authority may participate in national, European or co-ﬁnanced research or other programmes. To this end, the Authority may, following a decision of its President, opena regular bank account under the Group of Accounts 260— Cash Management with the Bank of Greece, to whichappropriations will be transferred from those programmes, as well as from other resources related to the exercise of its powers provided for under the GDPR or the law. Themanagement and control of the above special account shallbe regulated by the special provision of Article 2(3) of Law3051/2002. The Authority shall enjoy full independencein the management of this account. The revenue of theAuthority shall constitute state budget revenue.
6. Where members and staﬀ of the Authority participatein collective bodies established in the context of projectsﬁnanced by the European Structural and Investment Funds or the Public Investment Programme, the provisions ofArticle 21(2), (3) and (5) of Law 4354/2015 (GovernmentGazette A’ 176) shall apply accordingly, provided that the relevant expenditure is borne by these sources of funding and does not place a burden on the state budget.
7. The ﬁnancial audit of the Authority shall be conducted in a way that does not interfere with its operation nor does it aﬀect its independence.
Article 20
Legal protection against the Authority
1. Regulatory decisions and individual administrativeacts issued by the Authority, including decisions imposingpenalties, shall be challenged by way of action forannulment before the Council of State.
2. The period of time for lodging an action for annulment shall not have suspensive eﬀect on the contested act. The court may, at the request of the applicant, suspend the execution of the act in whole or in part, in accordance with the provisions in force.
3. An action for annulment against the decisions andacts of the Authority may also be brought by the competentMinister.
4. The Authority shall be represented in and out of courtby its President. The Authority shall be an autonomousparty to any kind of court proceedings with the participationof its members in their capacity as lawyers or its legalservice, provided the legal service is set up. The Authority’s legal service shall be staﬀed by lawyers with a salaried mandate recruited in accordance with the provisions of theCode of Lawyers. The Authority may also be represented on a case-by-case basis by lawyers specialised in their subject matter by means of a reasoned decision providingthe relevant power of attorney.
CHAPTER C
SUPPLEMENTARY MEASURES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE GDPR REGARDINGTHE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA
Article 21
Consent of minors
1. Where point (a) of Article 6(1) applies, in relation to the oﬀering of information society services directly to a minor, the processing of the personal data of a minor shall belawful where the minor is at least 15 years old and giveshis or her consent.
2. Where the minor is below the age of 15 years, theprocessing referred to in paragraph 1 shall be lawful onlyif consent is given by the legal representative of the minor.
Article 22
Processing of special categories of personal data
1. By way of derogation from Article 9(1) of the GDPR,the processing of special categories of personal data withinthe meaning of Article 9(1) of the GDPR by public andprivate bodies shall be allowed, if necessary: (a) for the purpose of exercising the rights arising from the right to social security and social protection, and for fulﬁlling the obligations arising therefrom; (b) for the purposes of preventive medicine, for theassessment of the working capacity of the employee,medical diagnosis, the provision of health or social careor the management of health or social care systems orpursuant to a contract with a health professional or otherperson who is subject to a duty of professional secrecy orsupervised by him/her; or (c) for reasons of public interest in the area of public
health, such as protecting against serious cross-border threats to health or ensuring high standards of qualityand safety of health care and of medicinal products ormedical devices, in addition to the measures referred to inthe second subparagraph of paragraph 3, the provisionsensuring professional secrecy provided for in a law or codeof conduct must in particular be complied with. 
2. By way of derogation from Article 9(1) of the GDPR,the processing of special categories of personal data bypublic bodies within the meaning of Article 9(1) of theGDPR shall be allowed, where it is:
(a) strictly necessary for reasons of essential publicinterest; (b) necessary for the prevention of major threats tonational or public security; or (c) necessary for taking humanitarian action, in whichcase the interests in the processing override the interestsof the data subject.
3. In the cases referred to in the previous paragraphs, all appropriate and speciﬁc measures shall be taken to safeguard the interests of the data subject. Taking intoaccount the state of the art, the cost of implementation and the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing as well as the risks of varying severity for rights and freedomsof natural persons posed by the processing, such measuresmay include in particular: (a) technical and organisational measures to ensure thatthe processing complies with the GDPR; (b) measures to ensure that ex post veriﬁcation and determination of whether and by whom personal data havebeen entered, amended or removed is possible; (c) measures to raise awareness among staﬀ involved in the processing; (d) access rights restrictions to controllers andprocessors; (e) pseudonymisation of personal data; (f) encryption of personal data; (g) measures to ensure the ability, conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability and resilience of processing systemsand services relating to the processing of personal data,including the ability to rapidly restore the availability andaccess in the event of a physical or technical incident; (h) procedures for regularly testing, assessing and evaluating the eﬀectiveness of technical and organisational measures for ensuring the security of the processing; (i) speciﬁc rules to ensure compliance with this Law
and the GDPR in case of transfer or processing for otherpurposes; (j) designation of a DPO.
Article 23
Processing of genetic data
The processing of genetic data for health and lifeinsurance purposes shall be prohibited under Article 9(4)of the GDPR.
Article 24
Processing of personal data for other purposes by
public bodies
1. The processing of personal data by public bodies for apurpose other than that for which they were collected shallbe permitted where such processing is necessary for theperformance of the tasks assigned to them and providedthat it is necessary: (a) for the veriﬁcation of the information provided by the data subject because there are reasonable grounds for believing that such information is incorrect; (b) for the prevention of risks to national security, defence or public security, or for securing tax and customs revenue; (c) for the prosecution of criminal oﬀences; (d) for the prevention of serious harm to the rights of another person; (e) for the production of oﬃcial statistics.
2. The processing of special categories of personal data, as referred to in Article 9(1) of the GDPR, for a purposeother than that for which they have been collected, shallbe permitted provided that the conditions set out in the previous paragraph are fulﬁlled and one of the exemptions provided for in Article 9(2) of the GDPR or Article 22 of thisLaw applies.
Article 25
Processing of personal data for other purposes by
private bodies
1. The processing of personal data by private bodiesfor a purpose other than that for which they have beencollected shall be permitted, where necessary: (a) for the prevention of threats to national or publicsecurity at the request of a public body; or (b) for the prosecution of criminal oﬀences; or (c) for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims, unless the interests of the data subject override thegrounds for the processing of those data.
2. The processing of special categories of personal data,as referred to in Article 9(1) of the GDPR, for a purposeother than that for which they have been collected, shallbe permitted, provided that the conditions set out in the previous paragraph are fulﬁlled and one of the exemptions provided for in Article 9(2) of the GDPR or Article 22 of thisLaw applies.
Article 26
Transfer of personal data by public bodies 1. The transfer of personal data by a public body toanother public body shall be permitted, where necessaryfor the performance of the tasks of the transmitting body orthe third party to whom the data were transferred, providedthat the conditions enabling the processing under Article24 are met. The third party to whom the data have beentransferred shall process them only for the purpose forwhich they were transferred. Processing for other purposesshall be permitted only if the conditions laid down in Article24 are met.
2. Public bodies shall be permitted to transfer personaldata to private bodies, provided that: (a) the transfer is necessary for the performance of thetasks of the body transferring the data, and the conditionsset out in Article 24 are met; (b) the third party to whom the data have been transferredhas a legitimate interest in being aware of the transfer, andthe data subject does not have a legitimate interest in nottransferring the data relating to him or her; or (c) the processing is necessary for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims and the third party has pledged to the public body which has transferred the data that he or she will process the data only for the purpose forwhich they were transmitted. Processing for other purposesshall be permitted if the transfer is authorised in accordancewith paragraph 1 and the transmitting body has consentedto the transfer.
3. The transfer of special categories of personal datawithin the meaning of Article 9(1) of the GDPR shall bepermitted provided that the conditions set out in paragraph 1 or paragraph 2 are met and one of the exemptions in Article 9(2) of the GDPR or in accordance with Article 22hereof applies.
Article 27
Processing of personal data in the context of
employment
1. Employees’ personal data may be processed forthe purposes of the contract of employment where theprocessing is strictly necessary for deciding whether toenter into a contract of employment, or for the performanceof a contract of employment once it has been concluded.
2. Where an employee’s consent is, by way of exception, used as the legal basis for the processing of the employee’spersonal data, the following should be taken into accountin deciding whether consent was freely given, and inparticular: (a) the employee’s dependence, as set out in the contractof employment and (b) the circumstances under which consent was given.Consent can be given either in writing or in electronic formand must be clearly distinguishable from the contract ofemployment. The employer must inform the employee,either in writing or in electronic form, about the purposeof the processing of the employee’s personal data and hisor her right to withdraw consent under Article 7(3) of theGDPR.
3. By way of derogation from Article 9(1) of the GDPR,processing of special categories of personal data within themeaning of Article 9(1) of the GDPR for the purposes of thecontract of employment shall be permitted if it is necessary for the exercise of their rights or for compliance with legal obligations arising from employment, social security andsocial protection law, and there is no reason to believethat the data subject’s legitimate interests in relation toprocessing take precedence. Paragraph 2 shall also applyto consent given for the processing of special categories of personal data. Consent should explicitly refer to such data.
Article 22(3)(b) shall apply accordingly.
4. The processing of personal data, including specialcategories of the employees’ personal data, shall bepermitted for the purposes of the contract of employment onthe basis of collective labour agreements. The negotiatingparties shall comply with Article 88(2) of the GDPR.
5. The controller shall take appropriate measures toensure that, in particular, the principles for the processingof personal data laid down in Article 5 of the GDPR arecomplied with.
6. Paragraphs 1 to 5 shall also apply where personaldata, including special categories of employees’ personaldata, are subject to processing, without being stored or intended to be stored in a ﬁling system.
7. Processing of personal data through closed circuittelevision systems in the workplace, whether publiclyaccessible or not, shall only be permitted if it is necessaryfor the protection of persons and goods. Data collectedthrough a closed circuit television system cannot be usedas a criterion for assessing the performance of employees.The employees shall be informed in writing or electronicallyof the installation and operation of a closed circuit televisionsystem in the workplace.
8. For the purposes of this Law, employees mean workersrecruited under any type of employment relationship, or awork contract, or a service contract in the public and privatesector, regardless of the validity of the contract, as well asjob applicants and former workers.
Article 28
Processing and freedom of expression and information
1. To the extent necessary to reconcile the right to the protection of personal data with the right to freedom of expression and information, including processing for journalistic purposes and the purposes of academic, artistic or literary expression, the processing of personal data is allowed where: (a) the data subject has given his or her explicit consent, (b) it relates to personal data which are manifestly madepublic by the data subject, (c) the right to freedom of expression and the right to information override the right to the protection of the data subject’s personal data, inparticular on matters of general interest or where it relates to personal data of public ﬁgures, and (d) where it is limitedto what is necessary to ensure freedom of expression and the right to information, in particular with regard tospecial categories of personal data, criminal proceedings,convictions and related security measures, taking intoaccount the right of the data subject to his or her privateand family life.
2. To the extent necessary to reconcile the right to the protection of personal data with the right to freedom of expression and information, including processing for journalistic purposes and the purposes of academic, artistic or literary expression, the following shall not apply: (a) Chapter II of the GDPR (principles), except for Article 5, (b) Chapter III of the GDPR (rights of the data subject), c)
Chapter IV of the GDPR (controller and processor), except for Articles 28, 29 and 32, (d) Chapter V of the GDPR (transfer of personal data to third countries or internationalorganisations), (e) Chapter VII of the GDPR (cooperation and consistency) and f) Chapter IX of the GDPR (speciﬁc data processing situations)”.
Article 29
Processing of personal data for archiving purposes
in the public interest
1. By way of derogation from Article 9(1) of the GDPR,the processing of special categories of personal data withinthe meaning of Article 9(1) of the GDPR shall be allowedwhere it is necessary for archiving purposes in the publicinterest. The controller shall have the obligation to take suitable and speciﬁc measures to protect the data subject's legitimate interests. Such measures may include, as far aspossible, in particular: (a) access rights restrictions to controllers andprocessors; (b) pseudonymisation of personal data; (c) encryption of personal data; (d) designation of a DPO.
2. By way of derogation from Article 15 of the GDPR, the data subject’s right of access to data relating to him or her may be restricted where the exercise of that right is likely to render impossible or seriously impair the achievement of the objectives referred to in paragraph 1, and the exerciseof the right would entail a disproportionate eﬀort.
3. By way of derogation from Article 16 of the GDPR, thedata subject shall not have the right to have the personal data relating to him or her rectiﬁed where the exercise of that right is likely to render impossible or seriously impairthe achievement of the objectives referred to in paragraph 1 or the exercise of the rights of others.
4. By way of derogation from subparagraphs (a), (b) and (d) of Article 18(1), and from Articles 20 and 21 of the GDPR,the rights of the data subject shall be restricted where their exercise is likely to render impossible or seriously impair the achievement of the objectives referred to in paragraph1 and where such limitations are deemed to be necessaryfor the achievement of such objectives.
Article 30
Processing of personal data for scientiﬁc or historical research purposes or for the collection andmaintenance of statistical information
1. By way of derogation from Article 9(1) of the GDPR,the processing of special categories of personal data,within the meaning of Article 9(1) of the GDPR, shall beallowed without the consent of the data subject where the processing is necessary for scientiﬁc or historical research purposes, or for the collection and maintenance of statisticalinformation, and the interest of the controller is overridingthe interest of the data subject in not having his or herpersonal data processed. The controller shall have the obligation to take suitable and speciﬁc measures to protect the data subject's legitimate interests. Such measures mayinclude, in particular: (a) access rights restrictions to controllers andprocessors; (b) pseudonymisation of personal data; (c) encryption of personal data; (d) designation of a DPO.
2. By way of derogation form the provisions of Articles 15, 16, 18 and 21 of the GDPR, the rights of the data subject shall be limited where their exercise is likely to render impossible or seriously impair the achievementof the objectives referred to in paragraph 1 and wheresuch limitations are deemed to be necessary for theirachievement. For the same reason, the data subject’sright of access provided for in Article 15 of the GDPR shall not apply where personal data are necessary for scientiﬁc purposes and the provision of information would entail a disproportionate eﬀort.
3. In addition to what is referred to in paragraph 1,special categories of personal data, where processed forthe purposes of paragraph 1 shall, unless it is contrary tothe legitimate interest of the data subject, be anonymised as soon as the scientiﬁc or statistical purposes allow. Until then, the characteristics that can be used to match individualdetails associated with personal or real situations of an
identiﬁed or identiﬁable person must be stored separately. These characteristics can only be combined with individualdetails if required for research or statistical purposes.
4. The controller may publish personal data processed in the context of research, if the data subjects have given their consent in writing or the publication is necessary forthe presentation of the results of the research. In the lattercase, the results shall undergo pseudonymisation beforebeing published.
Article 31
Information to be provided where personal data are collected from the data subject
1. The obligation to inform the data subject pursuant to Article 13(3) of the GDPR shall not apply, with the exceptionof the exemption referred to in Article 13(4) of the GDPR where the information to be provided on further processing: (a) concerns further processing of data stored in a writtenform in which the controller directly addresses the datasubject, the purpose is compatible with the original purposeof collection in accordance with the GDPR, communicationwith the data subject is not in digital form and the interestof the data subject in being informed according to thecircumstances of the case, in particular as regards the context in which the data have been collected, is not deemed to be high; (b) in the case of a public body, would compromise theproper performance of the controller’s tasks within themeaning of points (a) to (e) of Article 23(1) of the GDPR,and the interest of the controller in not providing informationoverrides the data subject’s interest; (c) would compromise national or public security, andthe interest of the controller in not providing informationoverrides the data subject’s interest; (d) would prevent the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims, and the interest of the controller in notproviding information overrides the interest of the datasubject; (e) would compromise the conﬁdentiality of the data
transfer to public bodies.
2. Where no information is given to the data subjectin accordance with paragraph 1, the controller shalltake appropriate measures to protect the data subject’slegitimate interests, including the provision to the publicof the information referred to in Article 13(1) and (2) of theGDPR in an accurate, transparent, intelligible and easilyaccessible form, in clear and plain language. The controllershall state in writing the reasons for forgoing the provisionof information. The above subparagraphs shall not apply toindents (d) and (e) of the previous paragraph.
3. Where no notiﬁcation is given in the cases referred to in paragraph 1 due to a temporary obstacle, the controller, taking into account the speciﬁc conditions of the processing,should comply with the obligation to provide informationwithin a reasonable period of time after the obstacle hasbeen removed, but not later than a period of two (2) weeks.
4. If, at the start of a mandate or in the course of amandate, the customer disclosed data of third parties toan entity bound by an obligation of professional secrecy,the transmitting entity shall not be required to provideinformation to the data subject in accordance with Article13(3) of the GDPR, unless the interest of the data subjectin obtaining the information is overriding.
Article 32
Information to be provided where the personal data have not been obtained from the data subject
1. The obligation to inform the data subject in accordancewith Article 14(1), (2) and (4) of the GDPR shall not applywhere the provision of information: (a) in the case of public bodies: (aa) would compromise the proper performance of the controller’s tasks within the meaning of points (a) to (e) ofArticle 23(1) of the GDPR, or (bb) would compromise national or public security; and, therefore, the data subject’s interest in obtaining the information recedes, (b) in the case of private bodies: (aa) would prejudice the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims, or the processing includespersonal data resulting from contracts established underprivate law and is aimed at preventing damages caused by criminal oﬀences, unless the data subject has an overriding
legitimate interest in obtaining the information; or (bb) the competent public authority has speciﬁed to the controller that the publication of the data would compromisenational defence, national security and public security,while in the case of data processing for law enforcement purposes, speciﬁcation pursuant to the ﬁrst subparagraph is not required.
2. Where no information is provided to the data subjectin accordance with paragraph 1, the controller shalltake appropriate measures to protect the data subject’slegitimate interests, including the provision to the publicof the information referred to in Article 14(1) and (2) of theGDPR in an accurate, transparent, intelligible and easilyaccessible form, in clear and plain language. The controllershall state in writing the reasons for which he or she hasrefrained from providing information.
3. The obligation to provide information to the datasubject in accordance with Article 14(1) to (4) of the GDPR, with the exception of exemptions referred to in Article 14(5)of the GDPR, shall not apply insofar as, by fulﬁlling this obligation, information would be disclosed which by itsnature, in particular due to overriding legitimate interests of third parties, should remain conﬁdential.
Article 33
Right of access by the data subject/Communication of a personal data breach to the data subject
1. In addition to the exemptions laid down in Article 29(2) and Article 30(2), the right of access by the data subject  in accordance with Article 15 of the GDPR shall not apply,where: (a) the data subject is not informed in accordance withpoint (bb) of indents (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 of theprevious Article; or (b) the data  (aa) were recorded only because they cannot be erased due to retention requirements provided for in legal orregulatory provisions, or (bb) only serve purposes of protection or control of data,and the provision of information would require a disproportionate eﬀort, and the necessary technical and organisational measures render impossible theirprocessing for other purposes.
2. The grounds for refusing to provide information to thedata subject should be documented. Refusal to provide information should be justiﬁed to the data subject unless the disclosure of the factual or legal reasons on which therefusal is based would compromise the purpose pursuedby the refusal to provide information. Data stored for thepurpose of providing information to the data subject andfor the preparation of such provision may be processedsolely for that purpose and for purposes of data protection;the processing for other purposes shall be limited inaccordance with Article 18 of the GDPR.
3. The right of access by the data subject to personal data that are neither subject to automated nor to non-automated processing by a public authority, and stored in a ﬁling system, shall only apply if the data subject providesinformation allowing the retrieval of data and the eﬀort required to provide the information is not disproportionateto the interest of the data subject in being informed.
4. The data subject's right to be informed under Article 15 of the GDPR shall not apply to the extent that the provision of information would entail the disclosure of informationwhich, according to the law or by reason of its nature, inparticular due to overriding legitimate interests of third parties, should remain conﬁdential.
5. The obligation to notify under Article 34 of the GDPR, with the exception of the exemption referred to in Article34(3) of the GDPR, shall not apply to the extent that the obligation to notify would entail the disclosure of informationwhich, according to the law or by reason of its nature, inparticular due to overriding legitimate interests of third parties, should remain conﬁdential. By way of derogation from the previous subparagraph, the data subject mustbe informed, in accordance with Article 34 of the GDPR,where his or her interests, in particular taking into accountimminent damage, override the interest relating to maintaining conﬁdentiality.
Article 34
Right to erasure
1. If, in the case of non-automated processing, erasure is not possible due to the particular nature of storage or is only possible with disproportionate eﬀort, and the interestof the data subject in erasure is not considered signiﬁcant, the data subject’s right and the controller’s obligationto erase personal data in accordance with Article 17(1) of the GDPR, shall not apply, with the exception of the exemptions referred to in Article 17(3) of the GDPR. In this case, erasure shall be replaced by restriction of processingin accordance with Article 18 of the GDPR. The abovesubparagraphs shall not apply if the personal data havebeen unlawfully processed.
2. In addition to points (b) and (c) of Article 18(1) of the GDPR, the ﬁrst and second subparagraphs of the previous paragraph shall apply accordingly in the case of points (a) and (d) of Article 17(1) of the GDPR, to the extent that the controller has reason to believe that the erasure would beprejudicial to the legitimate interests of the data subject.The controller shall inform the data subject of the restrictionof processing where such information is not impossible or does not involve a disproportionate eﬀort.
3. In addition to point (b) of Article 17(3) of the GDPR,paragraph 1 shall apply accordingly in the case of point (a) of Article 17(1) of the GDPR, if erasure would be in conﬂict with statutory or contractual retention periods.
Article 35
Right to object
The right to object under Article 21(1) of the GDPR shallnot be applicable where a public body is concerned, if thereis a compelling public interest in the processing whichoverrides the interests of the data subject or if processingis mandatory by law.
Article 36
Ensuring the processing of personal data for national security purposes
The processing of personal data of the National Intelligence Service (NIS) staﬀ conducted by public andprivate bodies in the context of their tasks or responsibilitiesshall be performed by speciﬁcally authorised oﬃcers, whose names shall be communicated to the NIS. Any further transmission of the above personal data shall only be conducted upon approval of the NIS.
Article 37
Accreditation of certiﬁcation  bodies and  certiﬁcation
1. The accreditation of bodies which issue certiﬁcations under Article 42 of the GDPR shall be carried out by theNational Accreditation System (ESYD) in accordance with EN-ISO/IEC17065:2012 and additional requirements established by the Authority.
2. The ESYD shall revoke an accreditation if notiﬁed by the Authority that the requirements for accreditation are no longer met or the certiﬁcation body infringes the GDPR and the provisions hereof.
Article 38
Criminal penalties
1. Anyone who, without legal grounds: (a) interferes in any way with a data ﬁling system and in so doing is made aware of such data; (b) copies, removes, alters,harms, collects, registers, organises, structures, stores, adapts, modiﬁes, recovers, seeks information, correlates, combines, restricts, erases, destroys, shall be punishedwith imprisonment of up to one (1) year, unless the actis punishable with a more severe penalty under anotherprovision.
2. Anyone who uses, transmits, disseminates, disclosesby transmission, makes available, announces or makesaccessible to unauthorised persons personal data acquiredpursuant to indent (a) of paragraph 1, or allows unauthorisedpersons to become aware of such data, shall be punishedwith imprisonment, unless the act is punishable with a moresevere penalty under another provision.
3. If the act referred to in paragraph 2 relates to specialcategories of personal data referred to in Article 9(1) of the GDPR or data relating to criminal convictions and oﬀences or relevant security measures referred to in Article 10 of the GDPR, the oﬀender shall be punished with imprisonmentof at least one (1) year and a ﬁne of up to one hundred thousand euros (EUR 100,000), unless the act is punishablewith a more severe penalty under another provision.
4. The person who has committed the acts referredto in the previous paragraphs shall be punished withincarceration of up to ten (10) years, if he or she intended to secure for himself or herself or others an unjust proﬁt, orcause ﬁnancial loss to another person, or cause damage toanother person, and the total proﬁt or total loss exceeds the amount of one hundred and twenty thousand euros (EUR120,000).
5. If the acts referred to in paragraphs 1 to 3 have resultedin a risk to the free functioning of democracy or nationalsecurity, they shall be punishable with imprisonment and a ﬁne of up to three hundred thousand euros (EUR 300,000).
6. The felonies provided for in this Article shall fall within the jurisdiction of the three-member court of appeal for felonies.
Article 39
Administrative sanctions
1. Without prejudice to the Authority’s corrective powersin accordance with Article 58(2) of the GDPR, the Authority may, in a speciﬁc reasoned decision and following a previous notice summoning the interested parties to provide explanations, impose to bodies of the public sector, as thisis deﬁned in indent (a) of Article 14(1) of Law 4270/2014 (Government Gazette A’ 143), with the exception of public undertakings and bodies referred to in Chapter A of Law3429/2005 (Government Gazette A’ 314), in their capacityas data controllers, for infringements relating to: (a) indent (a) of Article 83(4) of the GDPR, with the exception of Articles 8, 27, 29, 42, 43 of the GDPR, (b)Article 83(5) and (6) of the GDPR, with the exception of Articles 17, 20, 47, 90 and 91 of the GDPR, (c) Articles 5, 6, 7, 22, 24, 26, 27 (with the exception of paragraph 7 thereof), Articles 28 to 31, and indent (a) of Article 32(1), Articles 33 to 35 of this Law, an administrative ﬁne of up to ten million euros(EUR 10,000,000).
2. When deciding whether to impose an administrative ﬁne and determining its amount, in each individual case due regard shall be given to the following: (a) the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement taking into account the scope or purpose of the processing concerned, as well as the number of data subjects aﬀectedand the level of damage suﬀered by them, (b) any action taken by the body of the public sector to mitigate the damage suﬀered by data subjects, (c) any relevant previous infringements by the body ofthe public sector, (d) the categories of personal data aﬀected by the infringement, (e) the manner in which the infringement becameknown to the Authority, in particular whether, and if so to what extent, the body of the public sector notiﬁed the infringement and
(f) where measures referred to in Article 58(2) of theGDPR have previously been ordered against the body ofthe public sector, with regard to the same infringement, thedegree of compliance with those measures.
3. If a body of the public sector, for the same or linkedprocessing operations, infringes several provisions of theGDPR or of this Law, the total amount of the administrative ﬁne shall not exceed the amount speciﬁed for the gravest infringement.
Article 40
Judicial remedy against a controller or processor
1. Actions brought by a data subject against a controlleror processor for breach of data protection provisions withinthe scope of the GDPR or the rights of the data subjectreferred to therein shall be brought before the civil courtsin whose district the controller or processor has his orher establishment. The actions referred to in the previoussubparagraph may also be brought before the civil courtsin whose district the data subject has his or her habitualresidence.
2. The previous paragraph shall not apply to actionsbrought against public authorities, where such authorities exercise sovereign power conferred on them.
3. Where the controller or processor has designateda representative in accordance with Article 27(1) of theGDPR, the representative in question shall be consideredto be a procedural representative for the serving of alldocuments carried out in the framework of civil proceedingspursuant to paragraph 1.
Article 41
Representation of a data subject
1. Where the data subject considers that the processingof personal data relating to him or her infringes theprovisions of the GDPR or Chapter III of this Law, he or she shall have the right to mandate a not-for-proﬁt body,organisation, association or a not-for-proﬁt group of persons without legal personality which has been properlyconstituted and is legally established in the Greek territory,has statutory objectives which are in the public interest andis active in the area of protection of data subjects' rightsand freedoms with regard to the protection of their personaldata, to lodge a complaint on his or her behalf with theAuthority in accordance with Article 77 of the GDPR, and to exercise on his or her behalf the rights referred to in Article 78 of the GDPR and Article 20 of this Law.
2. The representation mandate referred to in paragraph
1 shall be made by means of a speciﬁc written authorisation validated for the signature authenticity of the contractingparty in accordance with Article 11(1)(a) of the Code ofAdministrative Procedure (Law 2690/1999, GovernmentGazette A’ 45). The mandate may be revoked at any time,in whole or in part. Article 42 Public access to documents
1. The application of the provisions of Article 5 of theCode of Administrative Procedure relating to the provisionof documents by bodies of the public sector falling withinthe scope of Article 1 of the above Code and of otherprovisions relating to the issuing of documents by the body or authority or agency concerned shall remain unaﬀected, where those documents are personal data.
2. The application of the provisions of Article 22 of the Code of court organisation and status of judicial oﬃcials (Law 1756/1988, Government Gazette A’ 35) shall remain unaﬀected.
CHAPTER D TRANSPOSITION OF DIRECTIVE (2016/680)
SECTION I
SCOPE — GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Article 43
Scope
(Articles 1 and 2 of the Directive)
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to theprocessing of personal data by public authorities which arecompetent for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal oﬀences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and theprevention of threats to public security. In the above cases,the public authorities are always considered as controllers.Where, in this Chapter, provisions for processors areincluded, its provisions shall also apply to them.
Article 44
Deﬁnitions
(Article 3 of the Directive)
1. For the purposes of this Chapter: (a) ‘personal data’ means any information relating to an identiﬁed or identiﬁable natural person (‘data subject’); anidentiﬁable natural person is one who can be identiﬁed,directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identiﬁersuch as a name, an identiﬁcation number, location data,an online identiﬁer or to one or more factors speciﬁc to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, culturalor social identity of that natural person; (b) ‘processing’ means any operation or set of operationswhich is performed on personal data or on sets of personaldata, whether or not by automated means, such ascollection, recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, consultation, use,disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwisemaking available, alignment or combination, restriction,erasure or destruction; (c) ‘restriction of processing’ means the marking of storedpersonal data with the aim of limiting their processing in thefuture; (d) ‘proﬁling’ means any form of automated processing of personal data consisting in the use of personal datato evaluate certain personal aspects relating to a naturalperson, in particular to analyse or predict aspectsconcerning that natural person's performance at work,economic situation, health, personal preferences, interests,reliability, behaviour, location or movements; (e) ‘pseudonymisation’ means the processing ofpersonal data in such a manner that the personal data can no longer be attributed to a speciﬁc data subject without the
use of additional information, provided that such additionalinformation is kept separately and is subject to technicaland organisational measures to ensure that the personal data are not attributed to an identiﬁed or identiﬁable natural person; (f) ‘ﬁling system’ means any structured set of personaldata which are accessible according to speciﬁc criteria, whether centralised, decentralised or dispersed on afunctional or geographical basis; (g) ‘controller’ means the public authority which, alone orjointly with others, determines the purposes and means ofthe processing of personal data; (h) ‘processor’ means a natural or legal person, publicauthority, agency or other body which processes personaldata on behalf of the controller; (i) ‘recipient’ means a natural or legal person, publicauthority, agency or another body, to which the personaldata are disclosed, whether a third party or not. However,public authorities which may receive personal data in theframework of a particular inquiry in accordance with Unionlaw or any other law shall not be regarded as recipients; theprocessing of those data by those public authorities shallbe in compliance with the applicable data protection rulesaccording to the purposes of the processing; (j) ‘personal data breach’ means a breach of securityleading to the accidental or unlawful destruction, loss,alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to,personal data processed; (k) ‘genetic data’ means personal data relating to theinherited or acquired genetic characteristics of a naturalperson which give unique information about the physiologyor the health of that natural person and which result, inparticular, from an analysis of a biological sample from thenatural person in question; (l) ‘biometric data’ means personal data resulting from speciﬁc technical processing relating to the physical, physiological or behavioural characteristics of a natural person, which allow or conﬁrm the unique identiﬁcation of that natural person, such as facial images or dactyloscopicdata; (m) ‘data concerning health’ means personal datarelated to the physical or mental health of a natural person,including the provision of health care services, which revealinformation about his or her health status; (n) ‘special categories of personal data’ meanspersonal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, politicalopinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade unionmembership, and the processing of genetic data, biometricdata for the purpose of uniquely identifying a naturalperson, data concerning health or data concerning a natural person's sex life or sexual orientation; (o) ‘supervisory authority’ means an independent publicauthority which is established by a Member State pursuantto Article 41 of Directive (EU) 2016/680; (p) ‘international organisation’ means an organisationand its subordinate bodies governed by public internationallaw, or any other body which is set up by, or on the basis of,an agreement between two or more countries; (q) ‘consent’ means any freely given, speciﬁc for the purposes of the case, unambiguous and informedindication of the data subject's wishes by which he or she, by a statement or by a clear aﬃrmative action, signiﬁes agreement to the processing of personal data relating tohim or her.
Article 45
General Principles
(Article 4 of the Directive)
1. Personal data must be: (a) processed lawfully and fairly; (b) collected for speciﬁed, explicit and legitimate purposes and not processed in a manner that is incompatible withthose purposes;
(c) adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are processed; (d) accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date;every reasonable step provided for by provisions in forcemust be taken to ensure that personal data that areinaccurate, having regard to the purposes for which they are processed, are erased or rectiﬁed without delay; (e) kept in a form which permits identiﬁcation of data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposesfor which they are processed; (f) processed in a manner that ensures appropriatesecurity of the personal data, including protection againstunauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidentalloss, destruction or damage, using appropriate technical ororganisational measures.
2. The controller must be able to demonstratecompliance with his or her obligations pursuant to theprevious paragraph.
SECTION II
LEGAL BASES FOR PROCESSING
Article 46
Processing of special categories of personal data
(Article 10 of the Directive)
1. Processing of special categories of personal datashall only be allowed where strictly necessary for theperformance of the tasks of the controller.
2. Where special categories of personal data areprocessed, appropriate safeguards for the data subject’s  protected legitimate interests shall apply. Appropriatesafeguards may include in particular:
(a) speciﬁc requirements for data security or for monitoring data protection; (b) speciﬁc time limits within which data should be reviewed for erasure; (c) measures to raise awareness of staﬀ involved in processing operations; (d) restrictions on access to personal data within thecontroller (the competent body); (e) processing of such data using spatial andorganisational separation; (f) pseudonymisation of personal data; (g) encryption of personal data; or (h) speciﬁc codes of conduct to ensure lawful processing in case of transfer or processing for other purposes.
Article 47
Processing for other purposes
(Article 4 of the Directive)
The processing of personal data for a purpose other thanthat for which they have been collected shall be permittedwhere that other purpose is one of the purposes referred toin Article 43, the controller is authorised to process data forthat purpose and the processing carried out is necessaryand proportionate to that other purpose. The processing ofpersonal data for another purpose, which is not referred to in Article 43, shall be permitted where expressly provided for by law.
Article 48
Processing for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientiﬁc or historical research purposes or statistical purposes
(Article 4 of the Directive)
Personal data may be processed in the context of the purposes referred to in Article 43 for archiving purposes in the public interest, or for scientiﬁc or historical research purposes or statistical purposes, if this is in the publicinterest and appropriate safeguards are applied in relationto the data subject’s protected legitimate rights. Suchsafeguards may consist in anonymising personal data assoon as possible, taking measures to prevent unauthorised third-party access or their processing using spatial andorganisational separation from other speciﬁc tasks.
Article 49
Consent
1. To the extent that the processing of personal data is based on consent by law, the controller must be able todemonstrate that the data subject has given his or herconsent.
2. If the data subject's consent is given in the context of a written declaration which also concerns other matters,the request for consent should be presented in a mannerwhich is clearly distinguishable from the other matters, inan intelligible and easily accessible form, using clear andplain language.
3. The data subject shall have the right to withdraw hisor her consent at any time. The withdrawal of consent shall not aﬀect the lawfulness of processing based on consent given before its withdrawal. Prior to giving consent, the datasubject shall be informed of this right.
4. Consent produces its legal eﬀects only when it is based on the data subject’s free will. In assessing whetherconsent was freely given, account should be taken ofthe circumstances in which consent was given. The datasubject shall be informed of the intended purpose ofprocessing. If necessary, according to the circumstancesof the case in question or upon request, the data subjectshall also be informed of the consequences of the refusalof consent.
5. In case of special categories of personal data, consent must be explicitly referred to those data.
Article 50
Processing under the authority of the controller (Article 23 of the Directive)
Any person acting under the authority of the controlleror the processor, who has access to personal data, shallprocess such data on instructions from the controller,unless provided otherwise by law.
Article 51
Conﬁdentiality
All persons employed in the processing of personaldata shall process such data upon authorisation andshall be obliged, when taking up their duties, to maintain conﬁdentiality. The obligation of conﬁdentiality continues even after the termination of their employment.
Article 52
Automated individual decision-making
(Article 11 of the Directive)
1. A decision based solely on automated processing, which produces an adverse legal eﬀect concerning the datasubject or signiﬁcantly aﬀects him or her shall be permitted only if provided for by law.
2. Decisions referred to in the previous paragraph shallnot apply to special categories of personal data, unlessappropriate measures to safeguard the data subject’slegitimate interests are in place.
3. Proﬁling that results in discrimination against natural persons on the basis of special categories of personal datashall be prohibited.
SECTION III
RIGHTS OF THE DATA SUBJECT
Article 53
General information on data processing
(Articles 12 and 13 of the Directive)
The controller shall provide general and easily accessibleinformation to the public in plain and intelligible languagethrough the website of the public authority with regard to: (a) the purposes of processing, (b) the right of the data subject to request from the controller access to, rectiﬁcation, erasure or restriction of processing, (c) the identity and the contact details of the controllerand the DPO, (d) the right to lodge a complaint with the Authority, and (e) the contact details of the Authority.
Article 54
The data subject’s right to be informed
(Article 13 of the Directive)
1. In speciﬁc cases, and in particular where the personal data of the data subject have been collected in secrecy and in order to enable the exercise of his or her rights, the data subject should, in addition to the information referred to inthe previous Article, be informed, at least, of: (a) the legal basis for the processing; (b) the period for which the personal data will be stored, or, where that is not possible, the criteria used to determinethat period; (c) where applicable, the recipients of the personal data; (d) where necessary, further information, in particular where the personal data are collected without theknowledge of the data subject.
2. In the cases referred to in the previous paragraph,the controller may delay, restrict or omit the provision ofinformation to the data subject, if necessary, in order to: (a) enable the competent authorities to perform theirduties, as described in Article 43, (b) ensure national security or public security, or (c) protect the legitimate interests of third parties, which would otherwise be threatened, if the interest in avoidingthese threats overrides the interest of the data subject inbeing informed.
3. The provisions of paragraph 7 of the following Articleshall also apply to the restrictions of the previous paragraph.
Article 55
Right of access
(Articles 14 and 15 of the Directive)
1. The controller shall, at the data subject’s request,inform the data subject of the processing of personaldata relating to him or her. The data subject shall also beinformed of: (a) the personal data to be processed and the categoriesto which they belong; (b) any available information on the data origin; (c) the purposes and legal basis for the processing; (d) the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the data have been disclosed, in particular recipients in thirdcountries or international organisations; (e) the period for which the personal data will be stored,or, where that is not possible, the criteria used to determinethat period; (f) the possibility of exercising the right to rectiﬁcation or erasure or restriction of the processing of personal data; (g) the right to lodge a complaint with the Authority,pursuant to Article 58; (h) the contact details of the Authority. and 2. The previous paragraph shall not apply to personaldata which are processed only because they cannot beerased due to legal requirements for retention or for the solepurpose of data security or data protection audits, where the provision of information involves a disproportionate eﬀort and the processing for other purposes through appropriate technical and organisational measures is excluded.
3. No information shall be provided if the data subjectdoes not provide any information enabling his or her personal data to be found and, therefore, the eﬀort involved is disproportionate to the interest of the data subject inbeing informed.
4. In the cases referred to in paragraph 2 of the previousArticle, the controller may refuse to provide information in accordance with the ﬁrst subparagraph of paragraph 1 or to restrict, in whole or in part, the provision of information inaccordance with the second subparagraph of paragraph 1.
5. The data subject shall not be notiﬁed of the identity of the natural persons from whom the personal data originate,where such information is likely to endanger his or her lifeor physical integrity and fundamental freedoms, as well asin the case of protected witnesses or informants.
6. The controller shall inform the data subject in writing,without delay, of his or her decision to refuse or restrict access. The above notiﬁcation obligation of the controller shall not apply where the provision of such informationgives rise to a risk in accordance with paragraph 2 of the previous Article. The above notiﬁcation shall include the factual or legal reasons on which the refusal or restriction is based, unless such justiﬁcation would compromise the intended purpose of the refusal or restriction of access.
7. In case of refusal or restriction of access, the datasubject, pursuant to the previous paragraph, shall be informed of the possibility of exercising the right of access through the Authority, and, in particular, the possibility oflodging a complaint with the Authority under Article 58, andof bringing an action for annulment against the Authority’snegative decision before the Council of State. The decisionof the controller shall be transmitted to the Authority, unlessthe controller invokes national security concerns. In thecase of a complaint lodged with the Authority, the lattershall investigate whether the conditions necessary for therestriction of the right are met and shall inform the subject at least that all necessary veriﬁcations or reviews have been carried out by the Authority, as well as whether theprovisions on the protection of personal data have beeninfringed.
8. The controller shall document the factual or legalreasons on which the decision is based.
Article 56
Right to rectiﬁcation or erasure of personal data and restriction of processing
(Article 16 of the Directive)
1. The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller without delay the rectiﬁcation of inaccurate personal data relating to him or her. In particular, in thecase of statements or decisions, the question of accuracyis irrelevant to the content of the statement or decision.If the accuracy or inaccuracy of personal data cannot be ascertained, the controller shall restrict the processinginstead of deleting the data. In such a case, the controllershall inform the data subject before resuming the restriction.The data subject may also request to have incompletepersonal data completed, where this is reasonable, takinginto account the purposes of the processing.
2. The data subject shall have the right to obtain fromthe controller the erasure of personal data concerning himor her without delay, where the processing of such datainfringes the provisions of this Chapter, the knowledge ofthose data is no longer necessary for the performance oftasks or those data must be erased, so as to allow the controller to fulﬁl a legal obligation.
3. Instead of erasing personal data, the controller shallrestrict the processing, where: (a) there is reason to assume that the erasure wouldcompromise the legitimate interests of the data subject, (b) the personal data are to be kept, provided they serveas evidence for the purposes of Article 43, or (c) erasure would be impossible or would involve a disproportionate eﬀort due to the special storage mode. Personal data subject to restricted processing, inaccordance with the above, may be processed only for thepurpose preventing their erasure.
4.In automated ﬁling systems, technical measures should ensure that the restriction of processing is easilyvisible and that processing for other purposes is not possible without further examination.
5.Where the controller has rectiﬁed inaccuratepersonal data, he or she shall notify the rectiﬁcation to the body from which the controller obtained the data. In case of rectiﬁcation, erasure or restriction of processing in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 3, the controller shallinform the recipients to whom the personal data have beentransmitted of those measures. The recipient shall rectify orerase the personal data or restrict their processing.
6. The controller shall inform the data subject in writing of any refusal of rectiﬁcation or erasure of personal data or restriction of their processing. This shall not apply wherethe provision of such information gives rise to a risk inaccordance with Article 54(2). The information referred toin the previous subparagraph shall include the reasonsfor such refusal, unless such reasons compromise theintended purpose of the refusal.
7. In other respects, paragraphs 7 and 8 of the previousArticle shall apply accordingly.
Article 57
Modalities for exercising the rights of the data
subject
(Article 12 of the Directive)
1. The controller shall communicate with the data subjectin a concise, intelligible and easily accessible form, usingclear and plain language, in particular when addressingminors. The information shall be provided without prejudice to speciﬁc provisions by any appropriate means, including by electronic means. The controller should provide theinformation in the same form as the request.
2. Without prejudice to Article 55(5) and Article 56(6), thecontroller shall without delay inform the data subject of the status of his or her request.
3. The information provided in accordance withArticle 53, any communication made in accordance withArticles 54 and 64, as well as the requests processed inaccordance with Articles 55 and 56, shall not be subject to afee. Where a request in accordance with Articles 55 and 56is manifestly unfounded or is being abused, the controllermay charge a reasonable fee based on administrativecosts or may refuse to act on the request. In this case,the controller must be able to demonstrate the manifestly unfounded or excessive character of the request.
4. Where the controller has reasonable doubtsconcerning the identity of the data subject making therequest referred to in Articles 55 and 56, the controller mayrequest the provision of additional information necessary to conﬁrm the identity of the data subject.
Article 58
Right to lodge a complaint with the Authority
(Article 17 of the Directive)
1. The data subject shall have the right to lodge acomplaint with the Authority, if the data subject considersthat the processing of personal data relating to him orher by public authorities for the purposes referred to inArticle 43 infringes his or her rights. This shall not applyto the processing of personal data by the judicial andprosecutorial authorities when processing such data actingin their judicial capacity. The Authority shall inform the datasubject of the progress and the outcome of the complaintand of the possibility of bringing an action for annulmentbefore the Council of State against the decision on his orher complaint, in accordance with Article 20.
2. Where a complaint relating to processing is lodged withthe Authority instead of the competent supervisory authorityof another Member State of the European Union, theAuthority should transmit without delay to the supervisoryauthority of the other Member State of the EuropeanUnion the complaint falling within its competence. In sucha case, the Authority shall inform the data subject of thetransmission of his or her complaint and provide him or herwith any assistance upon his or her request.
Article 59
Rights of the data subject in criminal investigations and proceedings
(Article 18 of the Directive)
In the context of criminal investigations and proceedings, the right to be informed of the processing, to access, rectiﬁcation or erasure and restriction of personal data, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 54 to 56, shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of the Code ofCriminal Procedure, speciﬁc procedural provisions and theCode of court organisation and status of judicial oﬃcials, as applicable each time.
SECTION IV
OBLIGATIONS OF PROCESSORS AND CONTROLLERS
Article 60
Processor
(Articles 22 and 23 of the Directive)
1. Where processing is carried out on behalf of acontroller, the controller shall ensure compliance with theobligations arising from this Law and other provisionsrelating to the protection of personal data. The right of the data subject to be informed, to rectiﬁcation, erasure and restriction of the processing of personal data, as well as the right to compensation in this case shall be exercised vis-à-
vis the controller.
2. The controller shall be allowed to assign the processingof personal data only to processors who ensure that, byimplementing appropriate technical and organisationalmeasures, processing is carried out in accordance with thelaw and that the protection of the rights of the data subjectis guaranteed.
3. The carrying out of processing by a processor shouldbe governed by a contract or other legal act binding theprocessor to the controller and that sets out the subjectmatter, duration, nature and purpose of the processing, thecategories of data subjects and the rights and obligations ofthe controller. That contract or other legal act shall stipulate,in particular, that the processor: (a) acts only on instructions from the controller; where theprocessor is of the opinion that an instruction is unlawful,the processor should inform the controller without delay; (b) guarantees that persons authorised to process the personal data have pledged themselves to conﬁdentiality tothe extent that they are not under a valid statutory obligationof conﬁdentiality; (c) assists the controller by any appropriate means tosafeguard the data subject's rights; (d) at the controller’s discretion, returns or deletes allthe personal data after the end of the provision of data processing services, and deletes existing copies, unless there is a legal obligation to store the data; (e) provides to the controller all information necessaryto demonstrate compliance with his or her obligations, inparticular logs created in accordance with Article 74; (f) allows audits to be carried out by the controller or theauditor authorised by the controller, and contributes to suchaudits; (g) takes all necessary measures in accordance withArticle 62; (h) taking into account the nature of the processing andthe information available, assists the controller to ensurecompliance with the obligations laid down in Articles 62 to65 and 67.
4. In the event that the processor engages anotherprocessor, the processor should impose the sameobligations laid down in the contract with the controller, inaccordance with paragraph 3, which also applies to theprocessor, unless these obligations are already binding onthe other processor under other provisions.
5. The processor may engage another processoronly with prior written authorisation from the controller.Where the controller has given general authorisation tothe processor for the participation of another processor,the processor shall inform the controller of any intended changes concerning the addition or replacement of otherprocessors, thereby giving the controller the opportunity toobject to such changes.
6. The contract referred to in paragraph 3 shall be inwriting or in electronic form.
7. A processor who determines, in infringement of thisArticle, the purposes and means of processing shall beconsidered to be a controller.
Article 61
Joint controllers
(Article 21 of the Directive)
1. Where two or more controllers jointly determine thepurposes and means of processing, they shall be jointcontrollers. The duties and responsibilities of each jointcontroller shall be determined in a transparent manner, by means of a written arrangement, to the extent that their duties and responsibilities are not determined by law. Inparticular, the arrangement shall designate the person whowill be responsible for meeting the information obligations and before which authority the data subjects may exercise their rights.
2. The terms of the arrangement referred to in theprevious paragraph shall not prevent the data subject from exercising his or her rights against each of the joint controllers.
Article 62
Security of processing
(Articles 19 and 29 of the Directive)
1. The controller and processor, taking into account thestate of the art, the costs of implementation and the nature, scope, context and purposes of the processing as well as the likelihood and severity of the risks involved by theprocessing for the data subjects, shall take the necessarytechnical and organisational measures to ensure a levelof security appropriate to the risk during the processing ofpersonal data, in particular as regards the processing ofspecial categories of personal data.
2. The measures referred to in the previous paragraphmay include, inter alia, the pseudonymisation andencryption of personal data, where such measures arepossible for the purposes of the processing. The measuresin accordance with paragraph 1 should ensure: (a) the conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability and resilience of processing systems and services; and (b) the ability to restore the availability and access topersonal data in a timely manner in the event of a physicalor technical incident.
3. In respect of automated processing, the controllerand processor, following an evaluation of the risks, shallimplement measures designed to: (a) deny unauthorised persons access to processing equipment used for processing (‘equipment accesscontrol’); (b) prevent the unauthorised reading, copying, modiﬁcation or removal of data media (‘data media control’); (c) prevent the unauthorised input of personal data and the unauthorised inspection, modiﬁcation or deletion of stored personal data (‘storage control’); (d) prevent the use of automated processing systemsby unauthorised persons using data communicationequipment (‘user control’); (e) ensure that persons authorised to use an automatedprocessing system have access only to the personaldata covered by their access authorisation (‘data accesscontrol’); (f) ensure that it is possible to verify and establish thebodies to which personal data have been or may betransmitted or made available using data communicationequipment (‘communication control’); (g) ensure that it is subsequently possible to verifyand establish which personal data have been input intoautomated processing systems, and when and by whomthe personal data were input (‘input control’); (h) prevent the unauthorised reading, copying, modiﬁcation or deletion of personal data during transfers of personal data or during transportation of data media (‘transport control’); (i) ensure that installed systems may, in the case ofinterruption, be restored (‘recovery’); (j) ensure that the functions of the system perform,that the appearance of faults in the functions is reported (‘reliability’) and that stored personal data cannot becorrupted by means of a malfunctioning of the system
(‘integrity’); (k) ensure that the personal data to be processed onbehalf of the controller can only be processed according tothe instructions of the controller (‘processing control’); (l) ensure that the personal data are protected from lossand destruction (availability control); (m) ensure that the personal data collected for diﬀerent purposes can be processed using organisational or spatialseparation (possibility of separation).
The purpose of the ﬁrst subparagraph in indents (b) to (e) may be achieved, in particular, by means of encryptiontechnology.
Article 63
Notiﬁcation of a personal data breach to the
Authority
(Article 30 of the Directive)
1. In the case of a personal data breach, the controllershall notify without delay and, where feasible, not later thanseventy two (72) hours after having become aware of it,the personal data breach to the Authority, unless he or she reasonably considers on the basis of justiﬁable reasons that the breach is not likely to compromise the protected legal interests of a natural person. The notiﬁcation of thebreach to the Authority after the expiry of seventy two (72)hours shall be speciﬁcally justiﬁed as regards the reasons for the delay.
2. The processor shall notify the controller without delayafter becoming aware of a personal data breach.
3. The notiﬁcation referred to in paragraph 1 shall contain at least the following information: (a) the nature of the personal data breach including,where possible, the categories and number of data subjectsconcerned, and the categories and number of personal data records concerned; (b) the name and contact details of the data protection oﬃcer or other contact point where more information can be obtained; (c) a description of the likely consequences of thepersonal data breach; and (d) a description of the measures taken or proposed tobe taken by the controller to address the personal data breach and to mitigate its possible adverse eﬀects.
4. Where it is not possible to provide the informationreferred to in the previous paragraph at the same time with the notiﬁcation of the breach, the controller may provide the information in phases once it is available without furtherdelay.
5. The controller shall document any personal databreach comprising of the facts relating to the personal data breach, its eﬀects and the remedial action taken.
6. Where the personal data breach involves personaldata that have been transmitted by or to the controllerof another Member State, the information referred to inparagraph 3 shall be communicated to the controller of thatMember State without delay.
7. Further obligations of the controller regarding the notiﬁcation of personal data breaches shall remainunaﬀected.
Article 64
Communication of a personal data breach to the data subject
(Article 31 of the Directive)
1. Where the personal data breach is likely to result in a signiﬁcant risk to the protected legitimate interests of a natural person, the controller shall communicate thepersonal data breach to the data subject without delay.
2. When notifying the data subject in accordance withparagraph 1, the nature of the personal data breach shallbe described in clear and plain language and the content ofpoints (b), (c) and (d) of paragraph 3 of the previous Articleshall be at least indicated.
3. A communication to the data subject shall not berequired if any of the following conditions are met: (a) the controller has taken appropriate technical andorganisational security measures and has implemented those measures to the personal data aﬀected by the personal data breach. This applies in particular tomeasures, such as encryption, that render the personaldata unintelligible to any person who is not authorised toaccess it; (b) the controller has taken subsequent measures whichensure protection against personal data breach; or (c) disproportionate eﬀorts are required. In such a case, there shall instead be a public communication or similarmeasures whereby the data subjects are informed in an
equally eﬀective manner.
4. If the controller has not informed the data subjectof the personal data breach, the Authority may formallydeclare that it considers that the conditions of paragraph3 are not met. In doing so, it should consider the likelihood that the damage will result in a signiﬁcant risk within the meaning of paragraph 1.
5. The communication to the data subject pursuant toparagraph 1 may be delayed, restricted or omitted subject to the conditions laid down in Article 54(2), except wherethe interests of the data subject override the signiﬁcant risk of the breach within the meaning of paragraph 1.
Article 65
Assessment of the impact of processing on the protection of personal data
(Article 27 of the Directive)
1. If a form of processing, in particular where using new technologies, is likely to result in a signiﬁcant risk to the protected legitimate interests of the data subjects due to thenature, scope, conditions and purposes of the processing, the controller shall ﬁrst carry out an assessment of the impact of the envisaged processing for the data subjects.
2. To investigate such processing operations with similar potential for signiﬁcant risk, a data protection impact assessment may be carried out jointly.
3.The impact assessment shall take into account the rights of the data subject which are aﬀected by the processing and must contain at least the following: (a) a systematic description of the envisaged operationsand purposes of the processing; (b) an assessment of the necessity and proportionalityof the processing operations in relation to the intendedpurposes; (c) an assessment of the risks to the protected legitimateinterests of the data subject; and (d) the measures to be taken to address the existing risks,
including safeguards, security measures and procedures toensure the protection of personal data and to demonstratecompliance with legal requirements.
4. Where necessary, the controller shall check whetherthe processing complies with the requirements of theimpact assessment.
Article 66
Cooperation with the Authority (Article 26 of the Directive)
The controller and processor shall cooperate with theAuthority in the performance of its tasks.
Article 67
Prior consultation of the Authority (Article 28 of the Directive)
1. The controller shall consult the Authority prior to processing personal data which will form part of a new ﬁling system to be created, where: (a) a data protection impact assessment as providedfor in Article 65 indicates that the processing would result in a signiﬁcant risk to the protected legitimate interests of the data subject in the absence of measures taken by thecontroller to mitigate the risk; or (b) the type of processing, in particular due to the use ofnew technologies, mechanisms or procedures, involves a signiﬁcant risk to the protected legitimate interests of the data subject.
2. During the preparation of draft laws or regulationsrelating to the processing of personal data by competentauthorities for the purposes of Article 43 or linked to theprocessing, the Authority shall be consulted in a timelymanner.
3. The Authority may establish a list of the processingoperations which are subject to prior consultation pursuantto paragraph 1. The Authority shall communicate this list tothe controller.
4. During prior consultation, the Authority shall beprovided with: (a) a data protection impact assessment carried out inaccordance with Article 65; (b) where applicable, information about the responsibilitiesof the controller, joint controllers and processors involved; (c) information about the purposes and means of theintended processing; (d) information about the measures and safeguardsprovided to protect the legitimate interests of the datasubjects; and (e) the name and contact details of the DPO.
The Authority shall receive upon request any other information necessary to assess the lawfulness of the processing and, in particular, the existing risks for the protection of personal data of the data subjects and of therelated safeguards.
5. Where the Authority is of the opinion that the intendedprocessing would infringe the law, in particular where the controller has insuﬃciently identiﬁed the risk or has nottaken suﬃcient measures to mitigate the risk, the Authoritymay provide, within a period of up to six (6) weeks of receipt of the request for consultation, written recommendations tothe controller and, where applicable, the processor withregard to additional measures to be taken. The Authority may extend that period by one (1) month if the intendedprocessing is highly complex. In this case, the Authority shallinform the controller or processor of any such extension.
6. Where the envisaged processing is necessaryfor the performance of the tasks of the controller, and istherefore particularly urgent, the controller may initiate suchprocessing after the start of the consultation, but before the expiry of the period referred to in the ﬁrst subparagraph of the previous paragraph. In this case, the recommendations must be taken into account ex post and the method of processing shall be adjusted accordingly.
Article 68
Records of processing activities (Article 24 of the Directive)
1. The controller shall maintain a record of all categoriesof processing activities under his or her responsibility. Thatrecord shall contain the following information: (a) the name or business name and the contact detailsof the controller and, where applicable, any joint controllerand the DPO; (b) the purposes of the processing; (c) the categories of recipients to whom the personal data have been or will be disclosed, including recipients inthird countries or international organisations; (d) a description of the categories of data subjects and of the categories of personal data; (e) where applicable, the use of proﬁling; (f) where applicable, the categories of transfers of personal data to a third country or an internationalorganisation; (g) an indication of the legal basis for the processing; (h) the prescribed time limits for erasure of the diﬀerent categories of personal data or for review of the need fortheir erasure; and (i) a general description of the technical and organisationalsecurity measures referred to in Article 62.
2. The processor should maintain a record of allcategories of processing activities carried out on behalf of acontroller, containing: (a) the name or business name and the contact detailsof each processor, each controller on behalf of whom theprocessor is acting and, where applicable, of the DPO; (b) the categories of processing carried out on behalf ofeach controller; (c) where applicable, transfers of personal data to an identiﬁed third country or an international organisationwhere the processor has explicitly been instructed to do so by the controller; and (d) where possible, a general description of the technicaland organisational security measures referred to in Article62.
3. The records referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shallbe in writing.
4. The controller and processor shall make those recordsavailable to the Authority on request.
Article 69
Data protection by design and by default (Article 20 of the Directive)
1. The controller shall, both at the time of the determinationof the means for processing and at the time of theprocessing itself, take appropriate measures to implementdata protection principles, such as data minimisation, in an eﬀective manner, in order to ensure compliance with the legal requirements and the protection of the rights of datasubjects. The controller shall take into account the state ofthe art, the costs of implementation and the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing, as well as the risks of varying likelihood and severity for the protected legitimateinterests of the data subject. In particular, personal datashall be processed and the processing systems shall beselected and designed in accordance with the principle ofminimisation. As far as possible, personal data shall beanonymised or pseudonymised as soon as possible inaccordance with the purpose of the processing.
2. The controller shall implement appropriate technicaland organisational measures to ensure that, by default, only personal data necessary for each speciﬁc purpose of the processing are processed. This applies to the amount of personal data collected, the extent of their processing, the period of their storage and their accessibility. In particular,such measures shall ensure that by default personal data are not made accessible by automated means to an indeﬁnite number of persons. 
Article 70
Distinction between diﬀerent categories of data subject (Αrticle 6 of the Directive)
1. Where processing personal data, the controller shall, as far as possible, make a clear distinction between diﬀerent categories of data subjects. This applies in particular to thefollowing categories:
(a) persons with regard to whom there are seriousgrounds for believing that they have committed a criminal oﬀence; (b) persons with regard to whom there are seriousgrounds for believing that they are about to commit a criminal oﬀence; (c) persons convicted of a criminal oﬀence; (d) victims of a criminal oﬀence or persons with regard to whom certain facts give rise to reasons for believing that he or she could be the victim of a criminal oﬀence; and (e) other persons, such as witnesses, informants orcontacts or associates of the persons referred to in indents (a) to (d).
Article 71
Distinction between personal data and veriﬁcation of their identity (Αrticle 7 of the Directive)
During processing, the controller shall distinguish, as faras possible, personal data based on facts from personaldata based on personal assessments. To this end, thecontroller shall specify the evaluations based on personal assessments as such, insofar as it is feasible, in the context of such processing. It should also be possible to determinewhich public authority maintains the records on which theevaluation upon personal assessment is based.
Article 72
Transmission procedure (Articles 7 and 9 of the Directive)
1. The controller shall take appropriate measures toensure that personal data which are inaccurate or no longerup to date are not transmitted or otherwise made available.To that end, the controller shall, as far as possible, verify thequality of personal data before they are transmitted or made available, making a reasonable eﬀort. The controller should also, as far as possible and reasonable, in all transmissionsof personal data include necessary information enabling therecipient to assess the degree of accuracy, completeness and reliability of personal data, and the extent to which they are up to date.
2. Where the processing of personal data is subject to speciﬁc conditions as to the transmission of data, the transmitting authority shall inform the recipient of thoseconditions and the requirement to comply with them. The obligation to provide information may be fulﬁlled by marking the data accordingly.
3. The transmitting competent authority shall notapply the conditions set out in the previous paragraph to recipients in other Member States or to agencies, oﬃces and bodies established pursuant to Chapters 4 and 5 of Title V of the TFEU other than those applicable to similartransmissions of data within the within the Greek territory.
Article 73
Rectiﬁcation and erasure of personal data and restriction of processing (Article 5 of the Directive)
1. The controller shall rectify inaccurate personal data.
2. The controller shall erase personal data without delay, if the processing is unlawful, and the data must be erasedto comply with a legal obligation or it is no longer necessaryfor the controller to be aware of such data to perform his orher tasks.
3. Paragraphs 3 to 5 of Article 56 shall apply accordingly.The recipient shall also be informed whether or notinaccurate personal data have been transmitted or whetherpersonal data have been transmitted unlawfully.
4. Without prejudice to the maximum time limits for storage or erasure laid down in legal provisions, thecontroller shall provide for the erasure of personal data orfor a periodic review of the need for storing personal dataand shall ensure compliance with those time limits basedon set procedural regulations.
Article 74
Logging (Article 25 of the Directive)
1. The controller and the processor shall keep logs inautomated processing systems for at least the followingprocessing operations: (a) collection, (b) alteration, (c) consultation, (d) disclosure including transfers; (e) combination and (f) erasure.
2. The logs of consultation and disclosure shall make it possible to establish the justiﬁcation, date and time of suchoperations and, as far as possible, the identiﬁcation of the person who consulted or disclosed personal data, and theidentity of the recipients of such personal data.
3. The logs shall be used solely for veriﬁcation of the lawfulness of data processing by the Authority and the data subject, as well as for self-monitoring, ensuring the integrity and security of the personal data, and for criminalproceedings.
4. The logs shall be deleted at the end of the yearfollowing the year in which they were created.
5. The controller and processor shall make the logsavailable to the Authority on request.
SECTION V
TRANSFERS OF PERSONAL DATA TO THIRD COUNTRIES OR INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS
Article 75
General principles for transfers of personal data (Article 35 of the Directive)
1. Where all the other conditions for transfers of personaldata laid down in this Chapter are met, the transfer ofpersonal data to the authorities of third countries orinternational organisations may take place, where: (a) the authority or international organisation is competentfor the purposes referred to in Article 43, and (b) the Commission has adopted a decision ensuring anadequate level of protection in the third country, a territory or one or more speciﬁed sectors within that third country, or the international organisation in question, or, in the absenceof such a decision, appropriate safeguards have been provided or exist pursuant to the following Article or, in theabsence of the above, derogations for speciﬁc situations apply pursuant to Article 77.
2. The transfer of personal data may not take place,in spite of an adequacy decision in accordance with theprevious paragraph and although this is required by thepublic interest, if, in such case, the protection of the datasubject’s fundamental rights and legitimate interestscannot be ensured when their data are processed by theirrecipient. The controller shall assess the level of protectionof such rights and legitimate interests of the data subjecton the basis of whether the recipient of the personal datain the third country ensures in this case their appropriateprotection.
3. Where personal data transferred or made availablefrom another Member State of the European Union must betransferred in accordance with paragraph 1, the competent authority of the other Member State must have ﬁrst given its authorisation to such transfer. Transfers without priorauthorisation shall be permitted only where the transfer isnecessary for the prevention of an immediate and seriousrisk to public security of a State or to essential interestsof a Member State and the prior authorisation cannot beobtained in a timely manner. In the case of paragraph 2,the authority or body of the other Member State responsiblefor giving authorisation shall be informed of the transferimmediately.
4. The controller transferring personal data pursuant toparagraph 1 shall take appropriate measures to ensurethat the recipient transmits only the data transmitted toother third countries or international organisations, wherethe controller has given prior authorisation to such transfer.Where the controller decides to give authorisation, thecontroller shall take due account of all relevant factors, in particular the seriousness of the oﬀence, the purpose for which the data were originally transferred, and the level ofpersonal data protection in the third country or internationalorganisation to which personal data are to be transferred.An authorisation may be given only if it is permitted totransfer personal data directly to another third country orinternational organisation.
Article 76
Transfers subject to appropriate safeguards (Article 37 of the Directive)
1. In the absence of an adequacy decision pursuant tosubparagraph (b) of paragraph 1 of the previous Article, atransfer of personal data to a third country or an internationalorganisation may take place where: (a) appropriate safeguards with regard to the protectionof personal data are provided for in a legally bindinginstrument, or (b) the controller has assessed all the circumstance ssurrounding the transfer of personal data and concludes that appropriate safeguards exist with regard to the protection of personal data.
2. The controller shall record the transfers underindent (b) of paragraph 1. The recording shall include thedate and time of the transfer, the identity of the recipient, the justiﬁcation for the transfer and the personal data transferred. The above recording shall be made availableto the Authority upon request.
Article 77
Derogations for speciﬁc situations (Article 38 of the Directive)
1. In the absence of an adequacy decision pursuant toArticle 75(1)(b), or of appropriate safeguards pursuant toparagraph 1 of the previous Article, transfers meeting theother conditions of Article 75 may take place only on thecondition that this is necessary in order to: (a) protect the vital interests of the data subject oranother person, (b) safeguard legitimate interests of the data subject, (c) prevent an immediate and serious threat to public security of a country, (d) in individual cases for the purposes set out in Article43, or (e) in individual cases for the establishment, exercise or
defence of legal claims relating to the purposes set out inArticle 43.
2. The transfer of personal data pursuant to the previousparagraph shall not be permitted, where the transferringcompetent authority determines that the data subject’sfundamental rights and legitimate interests override thepublic interest in the transfer.
3. Paragraph 2 of the previous Article shall applyaccordingly to the transfers referred to in paragraph 1.
Article 78
Transfers of personal data to recipients established in third countries (Article 39 of the Directive)
1. In speciﬁc individual cases, and if all other requirementsfor data transfers to third countries are fulﬁlled, controllers may transfer personal data directly to recipients establishedin third countries not referred to in indent (a) of Article 75(1),if the transfer is strictly necessary for the performance oftheir tasks, and (a) in this case, no fundamental right of the data subjectoverrides the public interest necessitating the transfer, (b) the transfer to the authorities referred to in in Article 75(1)(a) is ineﬀective or inappropriate, in particular because the transfer cannot be achieved in a timely manner, and
(c) the controller informs the recipient of the purposes ofthe processing and gives clear instructions to the recipientthat the transmitted data may be processed only to the extent necessary for such purposes.  
2. In the case of paragraph 1, the controller shall informwithout delay the authorities referred to in indent (a) of Article 75(1), unless that is ineﬀective or inappropriate.
3. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 75 shall apply accordinglyto transfers in accordance with paragraph 1.
4. In the case of transfers referred to in paragraph 1, thecontroller shall oblige the recipient to process the personaldata transferred without the consent of the controller onlyfor the purpose for which the data were transmitted.
5. Agreements in the ﬁeld of judicial cooperation in criminal matters and police cooperation shall remain unaﬀected.
SECTION VI
COOPERATION BETWEEN SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Article 79
Mutual assistance (Article 50 of the Directive)
1. The Authority shall provide the supervisory authoritiesof other Member States with information and mutualassistance insofar as necessary in order to implementthis Chapter. Mutual assistance shall cover, in particular,information requests and supervisory measures, suchas requests to carry out consultations, inspections andinvestigations.
2. The Authority shall take all appropriate measuresrequired to reply to a request of another supervisoryauthority for mutual assistance without delay and no laterthan one month after receiving the request.
3. The Authority may refuse to comply with the request: (a) if it is not competent for the subject matter of the request or for the measures it is requested to execute, or (b) compliance with the request infringes the law.
4. The Authority shall inform the requesting supervisory authority of the other Member State of the results or, asthe case may be, of the progress or the measures taken inorder to respond to the request. In the case of the previousparagraph, it shall justify its refusal to comply with therequest.
5. The Authority shall, as a rule, supply the informationrequested by the supervisory authority of the other MemberState by electronic means and in a standardised format.
6. The Authority shall not charge a fee for actions takenpursuant to a request for mutual assistance, unless it hasagreed with the supervisory authority of the other State to indemnify each other for speciﬁc expenditure arisingfrom the provision of mutual assistance in exceptional circumstances.
7. Requests to the Authority for assistance shall containall the necessary information, including the purpose of and reasons for the request. Information exchanged shall be used only for the purpose for which it was requested.
SECTION VII
LIABILITY AND PENALTIES
Article 80
Liability of the controller (Articles 54 and 56 of the Directive)
A public authority, in its capacity as a controller, havingunlawfully caused damage to the data subject, in breachof the provisions of Articles 6 to 8 or the provisions ofthis Chapter, shall be required, in accordance with theprovisions of Articles 105 and 106 of the Introductory Lawto the Greek Civil Code, to pay compensation or damages for non-material damage to the data subject.
Article 81
Criminal penalties
(Articles 54 and 57 of the Directive)
Article 38 shall also apply to the processing of personaldata by competent authorities for the purposes of Article 43.
Article 82
Administrative penalties (Articles 54 and 57 of the Directive)
1. Without prejudice to the supervisory powers of theAuthority pursuant to Article 15 of this Law, the Authority, in a speciﬁc reasoned decision and following a previous notice summoning the interested parties to provide explanations, may impose the following administrativeﬁnes on competent authorities for infringements of their obligations as data controllers: (a) for infringements of Articles 6 to 8 and Articles 60 to 78, an administrative ﬁne of up to one million euros (EUR 1,000,000), (b) for infringements of Articles 45 to 57, an administrative ﬁne up to two million euros (EUR 2,000,000) and (c) for failure to comply with an order of the Authority under Article 15(4), an administrative ﬁne of up to two million euros (EUR 2,000,000).
2. When deciding whether to impose an administrative ﬁne and determining its amount, in each individual case due regard shall be given to the following: (a) the nature, gravity, duration of the infringement, scopeor purpose of the processing concerned and the number of data subjects aﬀected by the breach and the extent of thedamage suﬀered, (b) any actions taken by the competent authority to mitigate the damage suﬀered by the data subjects, (c) any relevant previous infringements by the competentauthority, (d) the categories of personal data aﬀected by the infringement, (e) the manner in which the infringement became knownto the Authority, in particular whether, and if so to what extent, the competent authority notiﬁed the infringement and (f) in case the measures referred to in Article 15(4) havealready been ordered against the competent authority withregard to the same infringement, the degree of compliancewith those measures.
CHAPTER E
FINAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 83
Transitional provisions
1. Reference to Law 2472/1997 made in provisions ofthe legislation in force shall be construed as reference tothe relevant provisions of the GDPR and of this Law.
2. The guidelines and regulatory acts of the Authorityshall remain in force, provided that they do not infringe theGDPR and the provisions of this Law.
3. The staﬀ serving at the Authority at the time of passing this Law, both permanent and under an employmentrelationship governed by private law, shall be automaticallyassigned to equivalent positions governed by public orprivate law for each category, branch or specialty, in accordance with their formal qualiﬁcations.
4. Requests pending before the Authority until 25.5.2018 will be ﬁled without further action following a declaratoryact of the President with the exception of data subjects’ admissible applications.
Article 84
Repealed provisions
Law 2472/1997 on the protection of individuals withregard to the processing of personal data shall be repealed, without prejudice to the deﬁnitions of Article 2, whereexplicit reference is made to those deﬁnitions in legislation on personal data, to indent (b) of Article 2 (from the second until the last subparagraph) regarding the notiﬁcation and disclosure of personal data and to subparagraph (b) of Article 3(2) only with regard to the oﬀences described therein, to indent (b) of Article 3(2) of the above law (fromthe third until the last subparagraph) on the establishmentand operation of surveillance systems, to Article 13(3),Article 15(3) regarding the establishment of the Authority,to Article 18(2) and (3) and to Article 21 on the impositionof administrative sanctions under Article 13(4) of Law3471/2006 (Government Gazette A’ 133), which remain inforce.
Article 85
Validity of international or bilateral international agreements
International or bilateral international agreementsrelating to the transfer of personal data to third countries orinternational organisations in the area of judicial cooperationin criminal matters or police cooperation concluded before6.5.2016, which comply with the Union law applicable priorto that date, shall remain in force until amended, replacedor revoked.
* Article 86
* [This article is irrelevant to the data protection legislation. It is an amendment to another, unrelatedact of law.]
1. As from the entry into force of this Law, and withoutprejudice to paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, the following shall be repealed: (a) Article 1 of the Legislative Act of 18.7.2015“Urgent provisions for imposing restrictions on cashwithdrawals and capital transfers” (Government Gazette A’ 84,), which was ratiﬁed by Article 4 of Law 4350/2015 (Government Gazette A’ 161), as in force; (b) the ministerialorders adopted pursuant to authorisation provided by theabove Legislative Act of 18.7.2015; and (c) the regulatorydecisions of the Banking Transactions Approval Committee,which was set up in accordance with paragraph 4 of the ﬁrst Article of the Legislative Act of 28 June 2015 “Short-term bank holiday” (Government Gazette A’ 65) ratiﬁed by Article 1 of Law 4350/2015, as in force.
2. The Bank of Greece and the Hellenic Capital MarketCommission shall remain responsible for the continuationof outstanding audits and the conduct of new audits (sample or following a complaint) on the compliance of theinstitutions and bodies they supervise with the provisionsof the Legislative Act of 18.7.2015 “Urgent provisions forimposing restrictions on cash withdrawals and capital
transfers” (Government Gazette A’ 84) ratiﬁed by Article 4 of Law 4350/2015 (Government Gazette A’ 161), as in force,for infringements of its provisions which have taken placeuntil the entry into force of this Law. Paragraphs 13 and 13a of the ﬁrst Article of the Legislative Act of 18.7.2015 “Urgent provisions for imposing restrictions on cash withdrawals and capital transfers” (Government Gazette A’ 84) ratiﬁed by Article 4 of Law 4350/2015 (Government Gazette A’161), as in force, shall remain in force.
3. Paragraph 14 of the ﬁrst Article of the Legislative Act of 18.7.2015 “Urgent provisions for imposing restrictionson cash withdrawals and capital transfers” (Government Gazette A’ 84) ratiﬁed by Article 4 of Law 4350/2015 (Government Gazette A’ 161), as in force, shall remain inforce for infringements of its provisions which have takenplace until the entry into force of this Law.
4. The ﬁrst and second subparagraphs of paragraph 15of the ﬁrst Article of the Legislative Act of 18.7.2015 ‘“Urgent provisions for imposing restrictions on cash withdrawals and capital transfers” (Government Gazette A’ 84) ratiﬁed by Article 4 of Law 4350/2015 (Government Gazette A’161), as in force, shall remain in force.
5. The electronic ﬁle of the Banking Transactions Approval Committee shall be sealed and remain unaltered,in dormant state, in the relevant systems of the Bank ofGreece under the responsibility of the Bank’s InformationSystems Department. In particular, matters relating to the electronic ﬁle may be dealt with by means of an act of theBank of Greece Governor. The physical ﬁle shall be kept at
the Financial Policy Division of the General Secretariat of Economic Policy of the Ministry of Finance. Speciﬁc mattersrelating to the natural ﬁle may be dealt with by decision ofthe Minister of Finance. The ﬁle shall be accessible to the supervisory authorities referred to in paragraph 2, as wellas to any supervisory, judicial or prosecutorial authorityto enable them to investigate acts or omissions related toinfringements of the repealed provisions of paragraph 1during the period of validity of such provisions. Information contained in the ﬁle may be deleted by decision of the Minister of Finance after a period of 20 years from the dateon which the decision of the Banking Transactions ApprovalCommittee was adopted.
6. This Law shall enter into force on 1.9.2019.
Article 87
Entry into force
This Law shall enter into force on the date of itspublication in the Government Gazette, unless otherwiseprovided for in other provisions. We hereby order the publication of this Law in the Government Gazette and its execution as law of the State.
Athens, 28 August 2019
The President of the Republic
PROKOPIOS V. PAVLOPOULOS
The Ministers of Financeof Justice
CHRISTOS STAIKOURASKONSTANTINOS TSIARAS
Authenticated and stamped with the Great Seal of theState.
Athens, 29 August 2019
The Minister of Justice
KONSTANTINOS TSIARAS